<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Pamela, Or Virtue Rewarded (A CUNY Student Edition)</title>
  <link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>

<body>
    <h1>A Note on the Text</h1>
    <p>This CUNY Student Edition of <strong>Pamela, Or Virtue Rewarded</strong> was first prepared to provide a free-to-use, open-access, accessibly-designed, scholarly edition of the text for students and instructors at the City University of New York (CUNY). A community of student-scholars continue to improve it and, like all CUNY Student Editions, offer it to the public under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. This license invites anyone to freely share and adapt the material with few limitations.</p>
    <p>This edition is based on Richardson's first edition, published November 6, 1740 in two duodecimo volumes. It was compared to the second edition, published February 14, 1741. Running quotation marks and the long "s" have been modernized, but spelling, punctuation and styling has not been. Spaces in the text have been retained, and an attempt to render the typographic dashes correctly has been made. No table of contents appeared in any editions printed by Richardson, but a detailed one has been added to this digital edition to aid in navigation. These divisions should not be seen as suggestive.</p>
    <p>To read this book online, download it as an Epub, or contribute to the next version, visit <a href="https://cuny.manifoldapp.org/projects/pamela" target="_blank">https://cuny.manifoldapp.org/projects/pamela</a>.</p>
    <p>Version 1.0 - Published 30 Jun. 2019</p>
</body>
</html>