<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Pamela, Or Virtue Rewarded (A CUNY Student Edition)</title>
  <link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>

<body>
    <div class="letter">
				<h1 clas="title">Letter XXX</h1>
				<p class="salutation">My dear Father and Mother,</p>
				<p class="first">I Write again, tho’, may-be, I shall bring it to you in my Pocket myself. For I shall have no Writing, nor Writing-time, I hope, when I come to you. This is <strong>Wednesday</strong> Morning, and I shall, I hope, set out to you To-morrow Morning; but I have had more Trials, and more Vexation; but of another Complexion too a little, tho’ all from the same Quarter.</p>
				<p>Yesterday my Master, after he came from Hunting, sent for me. I went with great Terror; for I expected he would storm, and be in a fine Passion with me for my Freedom of Speech before: So I was resolv’d to begin first, with Submission, to disarm his Anger; and I fell upon my Knees as soon as I saw him; and I said, For God’s Sake, good Sir, and for the Sake of my dear good Lady your Mother, who recommended me to you with her last Words, let me beg you to forgive me all my Faults, as you hope to be forgiven yourself: And only grant me this Favour, the last I have to ask you, that you will let me depart your House with Peace and Quietness of Mind, that I may take such a Leave of my dear Fellow-servants as befits me; and that my Heart be not quite broken.</p>
				<p>He took me up, in a kinder manner, than ever I had known from him; and he said, Shut the Door, <strong>Pamela</strong>, and come to me in my Closet: I want to have a little serious Talk with you. How can I, Sir, said I, how can I? and wrung my Hands! O pray, Sir, let me go out of your Presence, I beseech you. By the God that made me, said he, I’ll do you no Harm. Shut the Parlour Door, and come to me in my Library.</p>
				<p>He then went into his Closet, which is his Library, and full of rich Pictures besides, a noble Apartment, tho’ called a Closet, and next the private Garden, into which it has a Door that opens. I shut the Parlour Door, as he bid me; but stood at it irresolute. Place some Confidence in me surely, said he, you may, when I have spoken thus solemnly. So I crept towards him with trembling Feet, and my Heart throbbing thro’ my Handkerchief. Come in, said he, when I bid you. I did so. Pray, Sir, said I, pity and spare me. I will, said he, as I hope to be sav’d. He sat down upon a rich Settee; and took hold of my Hand, and said, Don’t doubt me, <strong>Pamela</strong>. From this Moment, I will no more consider you as my Servant; and I desire you’ll not use me with Ingratitude for the Kindness I am going to express towards you. This a little embolden’d me; and he said, holding both my Hands in his, You have too much Wit and good Sense not to discover that I, in spite of my Heart, and all the Pride of it, cannot but love you. Yes, look up to me, my sweet-fac’d Girl! I must say I love you; and have put on a Behaviour to you, that was much against my Heart, in hopes to frighten you to my Purposes. You see I own it ingenuously; and don’t play your Sex upon me for it.</p>
				<p>I was unable to speak, and he saw me too much oppress’d with Confusion to go on in that Strain; and he said, Well, <strong>Pamela</strong>, let me know in what Situation of Life is your Father; I know he is a poor Man; but is he as low and as honest as he was when my Mother took you?</p>
				<p>Then I could speak a little; and with a down Look, (and I felt my Face glow like Fire) I said, Yes, Sir, as poor and as honest too; and that is my Pride. Says he, I will do something for him, if it be not your Fault, and make all your Family happy. Ah! Sir, said I, he is happier already than ever he can be, if his Daughter’s Innocence is to be the Price of your Favour. And I beg you will not speak to me on the only Side that can wound me. I have no Design of that sort, said he. O Sir, said I, tell me not so, tell me not so!—’Tis easy, said he, for me to be the Making of your Father, without injuring you. Well, Sir, said I, if this can be done, let me know how; and all I can do with Innocence shall be the Study and Practice of my Life—But Oh! what can such a poor Creature as I do, and do my Duty?—Said he, I would have you stay a Week or Fortnight only, and behave yourself with Kindness to me: I stoop to beg it of you, and you shall see all shall turn out beyond your Expectation. I see, said he, you are going to answer otherwise than I would have you; and I begin to be vex’d I should thus meanly sue; and so I will say, that your Behaviour before honest <strong>Longman</strong>, when I used you as I did, and you could so well have vindicated yourself, has quite charm’d me. And tho’ I am not pleased with all you said Yesterday while I was in the Closet, yet you have mov’d me more to admire you than before; and I am awaken’d to see more Worthiness in you than ever I saw in any Lady in the World. All the Servants, from the highest to the lowest, doat upon you, instead of envying you; and look upon you in so superior a Light, as speaks what you ought to be. I have seen more of your Letters than you imagine, (This surpriz’d me!) and am quite overcome with your charming manner of Writing, so free, so easy, and so much above your Sex; and all put together, makes me, as I tell you, love you to Extravagance. Now, <strong>Pamela</strong>, when I have stoop’d so low as to acknowledge all this, oblige me only to stay another Week or Fortnight, to give me Time to bring about some certain Affairs; and you shall see how much you shall find your Account in it.</p>
				<p>I trembled to find my poor Heart giving way!—O good Sir, said I, pray your Honour, spare a poor Maiden, that cannot look up to you, and speak. My Heart is full! And why should you wish to undo me!—Only oblige me, said he, to stay a Fortnight longer, and <strong>John</strong> shall carry word to your Father, that I will see him in the Time, either here or at the <strong>Swan</strong> in his Village. O my Heart will burst, said I! but, on my bended Knees, I beg you, Sir, to let me go to-morrow, as I design’d! And don’t offer to tempt a poor Creature, whose whole Will would be to do yours, if my Virtue and my Duty would permit.—They will, they shall permit it, said he; for I intend no Injury to you, God is my Witness!—Impossible, said I; I cannot, Sir, believe you after what has pass’d! How many Ways are there to undo poor Creatures! Good God, protect me this one time, and send me but to my dear Father’s Cot in Safety!—Strange, damn’d Fate! says he, that when I speak so solemnly, I can’t be believ’d!—What should I believe, Sir? said I; what can I believe? What have you said, but that I am to stay a Fortnight longer? and what then is to become of me!—My Pride of Birth and Fortune, (damn them both! said he, since they cannot obtain Credit with you, but must add to your Suspicions) will not let me stoop at once; and I ask you but for a Fortnight’s Stay, that after this Declaration, I may pacify those proud Demands upon me.</p>
				<p>O how my Heart throbbed! and I begun, for I did not know what I did, to say the Lord’s Prayer. None of your Beads to me, <strong>Pamela</strong>, said he, thou art a perfect Nun, I think.</p>
				<p>But I said aloud, with my Eyes lifted up to Heaven, <strong>Lead me not into Temptation. But deliver me from Evil</strong>, O my good God!—He hugg’d me in his Arms, and said, Well, my dear Girl, then you stay this Fortnight, and you shall see what I will do for you.—I’ll leave you a Moment, and walk into the next Room, to give you Time to think of it, that you shall see I have no Design upon you. Well, this, I thought, did not look amiss.</p>
				<div class="small-break" />
				<p>He went out, and I was tortur’d with twenty different Thoughts in a Minute; sometimes I thought, that to stay a Week or Fortnight longer in this House to obey him, while Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> was with me, could do no great Harm: But then, thinks I, how do I know what I may be able to do? I have withstood his Anger; but may I not relent at his Kindness?—How shall I stand that!—Well, I hope, thought I, by the same protecting Grace in which I will always confide!—But then, what has he promised?—Why he will make my poor Father and Mother’s Life comfortable. O, said I to myself, that is a rich Thought; but let me not dwell upon it, for fear I should indulge it to my Ruin.—What can he do for me, poor Girl as I am!—What can his Greatness stoop to! He talks, thought I, of his Pride of Heart, and Pride of Condition; O these are in his Head, and in his Heart too, or he would not confess them to me at such an Instant. Well then, thought I, this can be only to seduce me!—He has promis’d nothing.—But I am to <strong>see</strong> what he will do, if I stay a Fortnight; and this Fortnight, thought I again, is no such great Matter; and I shall see, in a few Days, how he carries it.—But then, when I again reflected upon the Distance between us, and his now open Declaration of Love, as he called it, and that after this he would talk with me on that Subject more plainly than ever, and I should be less arm’d, may be, to withstand him; and then I bethought myself, why, if he meant no Dishonour, he should not speak before Mrs. <strong>Jervis;</strong> and the odious frightful Closet came again into my Head, and my narrow Escape upon it; and how easy it might be for him to send Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> and the Maids out of the way; and so that all the Mischief he design’d me might be brought about in less than that Time; I resolved to go away, and trust all to Providence, and nothing to myself. And O how ought I to bless God for this Resolution! as you shall hear.</p>
				<div class="small-break" />
				<p>But just as I have writ to this Place, <strong>John</strong> sends me word, that he is going this Minute your way; and so I will send so far as I have written, and hope, by to-morrow Night, to ask your Blessings, at your own poor, but happy Abode, and tell you the rest by word of Mouth; and so I rest, till then, and for ever,</p>
				<p class="signature">Your dutiful Daughter.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="letter">
				<h1 class="title">Letter XXXI</h1>
				<p class="salutation">My dear Father and Mother,</p>
				<p class="first">I Will continue my Writing still, because, may-be, I shall like to read it, when I am with you, to see what Dangers God has enabled me to escape; and tho’ I bring it in my Pocket.</p>
				<p>I told you my Resolution, my happy Resolution, which, to be sure God inspired me with. And just then he came in again, with great Kindness in his Looks, and said, I make no doubt, <strong>Pamela</strong>, you will stay this Fortnight to oblige me. I knew not how to frame my Words so as to deny, and yet not make him storm. But, said I, Forgive, Sir, your poor distressed Maiden. I know I cannot possibly deserve any Favour at your Hands, consistent with my Honesty; and I beg you will let me go to my poor Father. Why, said he, thou art the veriest Fool that I ever knew. I tell you I will see your Father; I’ll send for him here to-morrow, in my Travelling Chariot, if you will; and I’ll let him know what I intend to do for him and you. What, Sir, may I ask you, can that be? Your Honour’s noble Estate may easily make him happy, and not unuseful perhaps to you in some respect or other. But what Price am I to pay for all this?—You shall be happy as you can wish, said he, I do assure you: And here I will now give you this Purse, in which are Fifty Guineas, which I will allow your Father yearly, and find an Employ suitable to his Liking, to deserve that and more: <strong>Pamela</strong>, he shall never want, depend upon it. I would have given you still more for him; but that perhaps you’d suspect I intended it as a Design upon you.—O Sir, said I, take back your Guineas, I will not touch one, nor will my Father, I am sure, till he knows what is to be done for them; and particularly what is to become of me. Why then, <strong>Pamela</strong>, said he, suppose I find a Man of Probity and genteel Calling for a Husband for you, that shall make you a Gentlewoman as long as you live?—I want no Husband, Sir, said I; for now I begun to see him in all his black Colours!—But being in his Power so, I thought I would a little dissemble. But, said he, you are so pretty, that go where you will, you will never be free from the Designs of some or other of our Sex; and I shall think I don’t answer the Care of my dying Mother for you, who committed you to me, if I don’t provide you a Husband, to protect your Virtue and your Innocence; and a worthy one I have thought of for you.</p>
				<p>O black, perfidious Creature, thought I! what an Implement art thou in the Hands of <strong>Lucifer</strong>, to ruin the innocent Heart!—But still I dissembled; for I fear’d much both him and the Place I was in. But who, pray Sir, have you thought of?—Why, said he, young Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, my Chaplain in <strong>Lincolnshire</strong>, who will make you happy. Does he know, Sir, said I, any thing of your Honour’s Intentions?—No, my Girl, said he, and kissed me (much against my Will; for his very Breath was now Poison to me!) but his Dependence on my Favour, and your Beauty and Merit, will make him rejoice at my Goodness to him.—Well, Sir, said I, then it is time enough to consider of this Matter; and this cannot hinder me from going to my Father’s: For what will staying a Fortnight longer signify to this? Your Honour’s Care and Goodness may extend to me <strong>there</strong> as well as <strong>here;</strong> and Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, and all the World, shall know that I am not ashamed of my Father’s Poverty.</p>
				<p>He would kiss me again, and I said, If I am to think of Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, or any body else, I beg <strong>you’ll</strong> not be so free with me: That is not pretty I’m sure. Well, said he, but you stay this next Fortnight, and in that time I’ll have both <strong>Williams</strong> and your Father here; for I will have the Match concluded in my House; and when I have brought it on, you shall settle it as you please together. Mean time take and send only these Fifty Pieces to your Father, as an Earnest of my Favour, and I’ll make you all happy.—Sir, said I, I beg at least two Hours to consider of this. I shall, said he, be gone out in one Hour, and I would have you write to your Father, what I propose, and <strong>John</strong> shall carry it on purpose; and he shall carry the Purse with him for the good old Man, if you approve it. Sir, said I, I will let you know in one Hour then my Resolution. Do so, said he; and gave me another Kiss, and let me go.</p>
				<p>O how I rejoiced I had got out of his Clutches!—So I write you this, that you may see how Matters stand; for I am resolv’d to come away, if possible. Base, wicked, treacherous Gentleman, as he is!</p>
				<p>So here was a Trap laid for your poor <strong>Pamela!</strong> I tremble to think of it!—O what a Scene of Wickedness was here laid down for all my wretched Life. Black-hearted Wretch! How I hate him!—For at first, as you’ll see by what I have written, he would have made me believe other things; and this of Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, I believe, came into his Head after he walked out from his Closet, as I suppose, to give himself time to think, as well as me, how to delude me better: But the Covering was now too thin, and easy to be seen through.</p>
				<p>I went to my Chamber, and the first thing I did, was to write to him; for I thought it was best not to see him again, if I could help it; and I put it under his Parlour-door, after I had copy’d it, as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Honour’d Sir,</p>
						<p class="first"><span class="first-word">Your</span> last Proposal to me, convinces me, that I ought not to stay; but to go to my Father, if it were but to ask his Advice about Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>. And I am so set upon it, that I am not to be persuaded. So, honour’d Sir, with a thousand Thanks for all Favours, I will set out to-morrow early; and the Honour you design’d me, as Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> tells me, of your Chariot, there will be no Occasion for; because I can hire, I believe, Farmer <strong>Brady’s</strong> Chaise. So begging you will not take it amiss, I shall ever be</p>
						<p class="signature">Your dutiful Servant.</p>
						<div class="postscript">
							<p>As to the Purse, Sir, my poor Father, to be sure, won’t forgive me, if I take it, till he can know how to deserve it. Which is impossible.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>So he has since sent Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> to tell me, that since I am resolv’d to go, go I may, and the Travelling Chariot shall be ready; but it shall be worse for me; for that he will never trouble himself about me as long as he lives. Well, so I get out of the House, I care not; only I should have been glad I could, with Innocence, have made you, my poor Parents, happy.</p>
				<p>I cannot imagine the Reason of it, but <strong>John</strong>, who I thought was gone with my last, is but now going; and he sends to know if I have any thing else to carry. So I break off to send you this with the former.</p>
				<p>I am now preparing for my Journey; and about taking Leave of my good Fellow-servants. And if I have not time to write, I must tell you the rest, when I am so happy as to be with you.</p>
				<p>One Word more, I slip in a Paper of Verses, on my going; sad poor Stuff! but as they come from me, you’ll not dislike them, may-be. I shew’d them to Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, and she liked them; and took a Copy; and made me sing them to her, and in the green Room too; but I looked into the Closet first. I will only add, that I am</p>
				<p class="signature">Your dutiful Daughter.</p>
				<div class="postscript">
					<p>Let me just say, that he has this Moment sent me five Guineas by Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, as a Present for my Pocket; so I shall be very rich; for as <strong>she</strong> brought them, I thought I might take them. He says he won’t see me: And I may go when I will in the Morning. And <strong>Lincolnshire Robin</strong> shall drive me; but he is so angry, he orders that nobody shall go out at the Door with me, not so much as into the Court-yard. Well! I can’t help it, not I! but does not this expose him more than me?</p>
					<p>But <strong>John</strong> waits, and I would have brought this and the other myself; but he says, he has put it up among other things, and so can take both as well as one.</p>
					<p><strong>John</strong> is very good, and very honest, God reward him! I’d give him a Guinea, now I’m so rich, if I thought he’d take it. I hear nothing of my Lady’s Cloaths, and those my Master gave me: For I told Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, I would not take them; but I fansy, by a Word or two that was dropt, they will be sent after me. Dear Sirs! what a rich <strong>Pamela</strong> you’ll have, if they should! But as I can’t wear them, if they do, I don’t desire them; and will turn them into Money, as I can have Opportunity. Well, no more—I’m in a fearful Hurry!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poem">
				<h1><span class="first-word">Verses</span> on my going away.</h1>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>I.</h2>
					<p><span class="first-word">My</span> Fellow-servants, dear, attend</p>
					<p>To these few Lines, which I have penn’d:</p>
					<p>I’m sure they’re from your honest Friend,</p>
					<p>	And Wisher-well, poor <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>II.</h2>
					<p>I from a State of low Degree</p>
					<p>Was taken by our good Lady.</p>
					<p>Some say it better had been for me,</p>
					<p>	I’d still been rustick <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>III.</h2>
					<p>But yet, my Friends, I hope not so:</p>
					<p>For, tho’ I to my Station low</p>
					<p>Again return, I joyful go,</p>
					<p>	And think no Shame to <strong>Pamela.</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>IV.</h2>
					<p>For what makes out true Happiness,</p>
					<p>But Innocence, and inward Peace?</p>
					<p>And that, thank God, I do possess:</p>
					<p>	O happy, happy <strong>Pamela!</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>V.</h2>
					<p>My future Lot I cannot know:</p>
					<p>But this, I’m sure, where-e’er I go,</p>
					<p>What-e’er I am, what-e’er I do,</p>
					<p>	I’ll be the grateful <strong>Pamela!</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>VI.</h2>
					<p>No sad Regrets my Heart annoy.</p>
					<p>I’ll pray for all your Peace and Joy</p>
					<p>From Master high, to Scullion Boy,</p>
					<p>	For all your Loves to <strong>Pamela.</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>VII.</h2>
					<p>One thing or two I’ve more to say;</p>
					<p>God’s holy Will, be sure obey;</p>
					<p>And for our Master always pray;</p>
					<p>	As ever shall poor <strong>Pamela.</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>VIII.</h2>
					<p>For, Oh! we pity should the Great,</p>
					<p>Instead of envying their Estate;</p>
					<p>Temptations always on ’em wait,</p>
					<p>	Exempt from which are such as we.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>IX.</h2>
					<p>Their Riches often are a Snare;</p>
					<p>At best, a pamper’d weighty Care:</p>
					<p>Their Servants far more happy are:</p>
					<p>	At least, so thinketh <strong>Pamela.</strong></p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>X.</h2>
					<p>Your Parents and Relations love:</p>
					<p>Let them your Duty ever prove;</p>
					<p>And you’ll be blessed from above,</p>
					<p>	As will, I hope, poor <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>XI.</h2>
					<p>For if ashamed I could be</p>
					<p>Of my poor Parents low Degree,</p>
					<p>I’m sure it would been worse for me,</p>
					<p>	God had not blessed <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>XII.</h2>
					<p>Thrice happy may you ever be,</p>
					<p>Each one in his and her Degree;</p>
					<p>And, Sirs, whene’er you think of me,</p>
					<p>	Pray for Content to <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>XIII.</h2>
					<p>Yes, pray for my Content and Peace;</p>
					<p>For, rest assur’d, I’ll never cease</p>
					<p>To pray for all your Joys Increase,</p>
					<p>	While Life is lent to <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-italics">
					<h2>XIV.</h2>
					<p>On God all future Good depends:</p>
					<p>Him let us serve. My Sonnet ends;</p>
					<p>With Thank-ye, Thank-ye, honest Friends,</p>
					<p>	For all your Loves to <strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="section" id="journal">
				<p class="first"><span class="first-word">Here</span> it is necessary to observe, that the fair <strong>Pamela’s</strong> Tryals were not yet over; but the worst of all were to come, at a Time when she thought them all at an End, and that she was returning to her Father: For when her Master found her Virtue was not to be subdu’d, and that he had in vain try’d to conquer his Passion for her, being a Gentleman of Pleasure and Intrigue, he had order’d his <strong>Lincolnshire</strong> Coachman to bring his Travelling Chariot from thence, not caring to trust his Body Coachman, who, with the rest of the Servants, so greatly loved and honour’d the fair Damsel; and having given him Instructions accordingly, and prohibited his other Servants, on Pretence of resenting <strong>Pamela’s</strong> Behaviour, from accompanying her any Part of the Way, he drove her five Miles on the Way to her Father’s; and then turning off, cross’d the Country, and carried her onward towards his <strong>Lincolnshire</strong> Estate.</p>
				<p>It is also to be observ’d, that the Messenger of her Letters to her Father, who so often pretended Business that way, was an Implement in his Master’s Hands, and employ’d by him for that Purpose; and who always gave her Letters first to him, and his Master used to open and read them, and then send them on; by which means, as he hints to her (as she observes in one of her Letters, <strong>p</strong>. 84) he was no Stranger to what she wrote. Thus every way was the poor Virgin beset: And the Whole will shew the base Arts of designing Men to gain their wicked Ends; and how much it behoves the Fair Sex to stand upon their Guard against their artful Contrivances, especially when Riches and Power conspire against Innocence and a low Estate.</p>
				<p>A few Words more will be necessary to make the Sequel better understood. The intriguing Gentleman thought fit, however, to keep back from her Father her three last Letters; in which she mentions his concealing himself to hear her partitioning out her Cloaths, his last Effort to induce her to stay a Fortnight, his pretended Proposal of the Chaplain, and her Hopes of speedily seeing them, as also her Verses; and to send himself a Letter to her Father, which is as follows.</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Goodman <strong>Andrews</strong>,</p>
						<p class="first"><span class="first-word">You</span> will wonder to receive a Letter from me. But I think I am obliged to let you know, that I have discover’d the strange Correspondence carry’d on between you and your Daughter, so injurious to my Honour and Reputation, and which I think you should not have encourag’d till you knew the Truth of it. Something, possibly, there might be in what she has wrote from time to time; but, believe me, with all her pretended Simplicity and Innocence, I never knew so much romantick Invention as she is Mistress of. In short, the Girl’s Head’s turn’d by Romances, and such idle Stuff, which she has given herself up to, ever since her kind Lady’s Death. And she assumes such Airs, as if she was a Mirror of Perfection, and believ’d every body had a Design upon her. Nay, she has not, I understand, spared me, who used to joke and divert myself with her Innocence, as I thought it.</p>
						<p>Don’t mistake me however; I believe her very honest, and very virtuous; but I have found out also, that she is carrying on a sort of Correspondence, or Love Affair, with a young Clergyman, that I hope in time to provide for; but who, at present, is destitute of any Subsistence but my Favour: And what would be the Consequence, can you think of two young Folks, who have nothing in the World to trust to of their own, to come together, with a Family multiplying upon them, before they have Bread to eat?</p>
						<p>For my Part, I have too much Kindness to them both, not to endeavour to prevent it, if I can: And for this Reason I have sent her out of his Way for a little while, till I can bring them to better Consideration; and I would not therefore have you surpriz’d you don’t see your Daughter so soon as you might possibly expect.</p>
						<p>Yet, I do assure you, upon my Honour, that she shall be safe and inviolate; and I hope you don’t doubt me, notwithstanding any Airs she may have given herself, upon my jocular Pleasantry to her, and perhaps a little innocent Romping with her, so usual with young Folks of the two Sexes, when they have been long acquainted, and grown up together; for Pride is not my Talent.</p>
						<p>As she is a mighty Letter-writer, I hope she has had the Duty to apprise you of her Intrigue with the young Clergyman; and I know not whether it meets with your Countenance: But now she is absent for a little while, (for I know he would have follow’d her to your Village, if she had gone home; and there perhaps they would have ruin’d one another, by marrying) I doubt not I shall bring him to see his Interest, and that he engages not before he knows how to provide for a Wife: And when that can be done, let them come together in God’s Name, for me.</p>
						<p>I expect not to be answer‘d on this Head, but by your good Opinion, and the Confidence you may repose in my Honour; being</p>
						<p class="signature">Your hearty Friend to serve you.</p>
						<div class="postscript">
							<p><strong>P.S</strong>. I find my Man <strong>John</strong> has been the Manager of the Correspondence, in which such Liberties have been taken with me. I shall soon let the sawcy Fellow know how much I resent his Part of the Affair, in a manner that becomes me. It is a hard thing, that a Man of my Character in the World, should be used thus freely by his own Servants.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>It is easy to guess at the poor old Man’s Concern upon reading this Letter, from a Gentleman of so much Consideration. He knew not what Course to take, and had no manner of Doubt of his poor Daughter’s Innocence, and that foul Play was design’d her. Yet he sometimes hoped the best, and was ready to believe the surmised Correspondence between the Clergyman and her, having not receiv’d the Letters she wrote, which would have clear’d up that Affair.</p>
				<p>But after all, he resolved, as well to quiet his own as his Wife’s Uneasiness, to undertake a Journey to the ’Squire’s; and leaving his poor Wife to excuse him to the Farmer who imploy’d him, he sat out that very Night, late as it was; and travelling all Night, he found himself soon after Day-light, at the Gate of the Gentleman, before the Family was up: And there he sat down to rest himself, till he should see somebody stirring.</p>
				<p>The Grooms were the first he saw, coming out to water their Horses; and he ask’d, in so distressful a manner, what was become of <strong>Pamela</strong>, that they thought him crasy; and said, Why, what have you to do with <strong>Pamela</strong>, old Fellow? Get out of the Horse’s Way.—Where is your Master? said the poor Man; pray, Gentlemen, don’t be angry: My Heart’s almost broke.—He never gives any thing at the Door, I assure you, says one of the Grooms; so you’ll lose your Labour.—I am not a Beggar yet, said the poor old Man; I want nothing of him, but my <strong>Pamela!</strong>—O my Child! my Child!</p>
				<p>I’ll be hang’d, says one of them, if this is not Mrs. <strong>Pamela’s</strong> Father!—Indeed, indeed, said he, wringing his Hands, I am; and weeping, Where is my Child? Where is my <strong>Pamela?</strong>—Why, Father, said one of them, we beg your Pardon; but she is gone home to you! How long have you been come from home?—O but last Night, said he; I have travelled all Night! Is the ’Squire at home, or is he not?—Yes, but he is not stirring tho’, said the Grooms, as yet. Thank God for that, said he! thank God for that! then I hope I may be permitted to speak to him anon. They asked him to go in, and he stept into the Stable, and sat down on the Stairs there, wiping his Eyes, and sighing so sadly, that it grieved the Servants to hear him.</p>
				<p>The Family was soon raised, with the Report of <strong>Pamela’s</strong> Father coming to inquire after his Daughter; and the Maids would fain have had him go into the Kitchen. But Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> having been told of his coming, got up, and hasten’d down to her Parlour, and took him in with her, and there heard all his sad Story, and read the Letter. She wept bitterly; but yet endeavoured to hide her Concern; and said, Well, Goodman <strong>Andrews</strong>, I cannot help weeping at your Grief; but I hope there is no Occasion; let nobody see this Letter, whatever you do. I dare say your Daughter’s safe.</p>
				<p>Well, but said he, I see you, Madam, know nothing about her!—If all was right, so good a Gentlewoman as you are, would not have been a Stranger to this. To be sure you thought she was with me!</p>
				<p>Said she, My Master does not always inform his Servants of his Proceedings; but you need not doubt his Honour. You have his Hand for it. And you may see he can have no Design upon her, because he is not from hence, and does not talk of going hence. O that is all I have to hope for, said he! that is all, indeed!—But, said he, and was going on, when the Report of his coming had reach’d the ’Squire, who came down in his Morning-gown and Slippers, into the Parlour, where he and Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> was.</p>
				<p>What’s the Matter, Goodman <strong>Andrews?</strong> said he; what’s the Matter? O my Child, said the good old Man, give me my Child, I beseech you, Sir—Why, I thought, says the ’Squire, that I had satisfy’d you about her; sure you have not a Letter I sent you, written with my own Hand. Yes, yes, but I have, Sir, said he, and that brought me hither; and I have walked all Night. Poor Man! return’d he, with great seeming Compassion, I am sorry for it truly! Why your Daughter has made a strange Racket in my Family; and if I thought it would have disturb’d you so much, I would have e’en let her gone home; but what I did was to serve her and you too. She is very safe, I do assure you, Goodman <strong>Andrews;</strong> and you may take my Honour for it, I would not injure her for the World. Do you think I would, Mrs. <strong>Jervis?</strong> No, I hope not, Sir, said she!—<strong>Hope not!</strong> said the poor Man, so do I; but pray, Sir, give me my Child; that is all I desire; and I’ll take care no Clergyman shall come near her.</p>
				<p>Why, <strong>London</strong> is a great way off, said the ’Squire, and I can’t send for her back presently. What then, said he, have you sent my poor <strong>Pamela</strong> to <strong>London?</strong> I would not have it said so, says the ’Squire; but I assure you, upon my Honour, she is quite safe and satisfied, and will quickly inform you of as much by Letter. I am sure she is in a reputable Family, no less than a Bishop’s, and will wait on his Lady till I get this Matter over, that I mentioned to you!</p>
				<p>O how shall I know this! reply’d he.—What, said the ’Squire, pretending Anger, am I to be doubted?—Do you believe I can have any View upon your Daughter! And if I had, do you think I would take such Methods as these to effect it? Why, Man, you know not who you talk to!—O Sir, said he, I beg your Pardon; but consider my dear Child is in the Case: Let me know what Bishop, and where, and I will travel to <strong>London</strong> barefoot, to see my Daughter, and then shall be satisfied.</p>
				<p>Why, Goodman <strong>Andrews</strong>, I think thou hast read Romances as well as thy Daughter, and thy Head’s turn’d with them. May I not have my word taken? Do you think, once more, I would offer any thing to your Daughter! Is there any thing looks like it?—Pr’ythee, Man, consider a little who I am; and if I am not to be believ’d, what signifies talking? Why, Sir, said he, pray forgive me; but there is no Harm to say, What Bishop’s, or whereabouts? What, and so you’d go troubling his Lordship with your impertinent Fears and Stories! Will you be satisfied if you have a Letter from her within a Week, it may be less, if she be not negligent, to assure you all is well with her? Why that, said the poor Man, will be a Comfort. Well then, said the ’Squire, I can’t answer for her Negligence, if she don’t; but she will send a Letter to you, Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, for I desire not to see it; I have had Trouble enough about her already; and be sure you send it by a Man and Horse the Moment you receive it. To be sure I will, said she. Thank your Honour, said the good Man. And then I must wait with as much Patience as I can for a Week, which will be a Year to me.</p>
				<p>I tell you, said the ’Squire, it must be her own Fault if she don’t; for ’tis what I insisted upon for my own Reputation; and I shan’t stir from this House, I assure you, till she is heard from, and that to Satisfaction. God bless your Honour, said the poor Man, as you say and mean Truth. <strong>Amen, Amen</strong>, Goodman <strong>Andrews</strong>, said he; you see I am not afraid to say <strong>Amen</strong>. So, Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, make the good Man as welcome as you can; and let me have no Uproar about the Matter.</p>
				<p>He then, whispering her, bid her give him a couple of Guineas to bear his Charges home; telling him, he should be welcome to stay there till the Letter came, if he would; and he should be a Witness, that he intended honourably, and not to stir from his House for one while.</p>
				<p>The poor old Man staid and din’d with Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, with some tolerable Ease, in hopes to hear from his beloved Daughter in a few Days, and then accepting the Present, return’d for his own House; and resolv’d to be as patient as possible for a few Days.</p>
				<p>Mean time Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, and all the Family, were in the utmost Grief for the Trick put upon the poor <strong>Pamela</strong>, and she and the Steward represented it to the ’Squire in as moving Terms as they durst: But were forced to rest satisfy’d with his general Assurances of intending her no Harm; which however Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> little believ’d from the Pretence he had made in his Letter, of the Correspondence between <strong>Pamela</strong> and the young Parson; which she knew to be all Invention; tho’ she durst not say any thing of it.</p>
				<p>But the Week after she went away, they were made a little more easy, by the following Letter, brought by an unknown Hand, and left for Mrs. <strong>Jervis;</strong> which how procur’d, will be shewn in the Sequel.</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Dear Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>,</p>
						<p class="first">I Have <strong>been vilely trick’d, and</strong>, instead of being driven by <strong>Robin</strong> to my dear Father’s, <strong>I am</strong> carry’d off, to where I have no Liberty to tell. However, I am at present not used hardly <strong>in the main;</strong> and I write to beg of you to let my dear Father and Mother (whose Hearts must be well-nigh broken) know, That I am well, and that I am, and, by the Grace of God, ever will be, their dutiful and honest Daughter, as well as</p>
						<p class="signature">Your obliged Friend,<br/>
						<strong>Pamela Andrews</strong>.</p>
						<div class="postscript">
							<p>I must neither send Date nor Place. But have most solemn Assurances of honourable Usage. <strong>This is the only Time my low Estate has been troublesome to me, since it has subjected me to the Frights I have undergone. Love to your good self, and all my dear Fellow-servants. Adieu! Adieu! But pray for poor</strong><strong class="small-caps">Pamela</strong>.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>This, tho’ it quieted not intirely their Apprehensions, was shewn to the whole Family, and to the ’Squire himself, who pretended to know not how it came; and Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> sent it away to the good old Folks; who at first suspected it was forged, and not their Daughter’s Hand; but finding the contrary, they were a little easier to hear she was alive and well. And having inquir’d of all their Acquaintance, what could be done, and no one being able to put them in a way how to proceed, with Effect, on so extraordinary an Occasion, against so rich and daring a Gentleman; and being afraid to make Matters worse, (tho’ they saw plainly enough, that by this Letter she was in no Bishop’s Family, and so mistrusted all the rest of his Story) they apply’d themselves to Prayers for their poor Daughter, and for a happy Issue to an Affair that almost distracted them.</p>
				<p>We shall now leave the honest old Pair, praying for their dear <strong>Pamela;</strong> and return to the Account she herself gives of all this; having written it Journal-wise, to amuse and employ her Time, in hopes some Opportunity might offer to send it to her Friends, and, as was her constant View, that she might afterwards thankfully look back upon the Dangers she had escaped, when they should be happily over-blown, as in time she hoped they would be; and that then she might examine, and either approve of, or repent for, her own Conduct in them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="letter">
				<h1>XXXII</h1>
				<p class="salutation">O my dearest Father and Mother,</p>
				<p class="first"><span class="first-word">Let</span> me write and bewail my miserable hard Fate, tho’ I have no Hope that what I write will be convey’d to your Hands!—I have now nothing to do but write, and weep, and fear, and pray; and yet, What can I pray for, when God Almighty, for my Sins, to be sure, vouchsafes not to hear my Prayers; but suffers me to be a Prey to a wicked Violator of all the Laws of God and Man!—But, gracious Heaven, forgive me my Rashness! O let me not sin against thee; for thou best knowest what is fittest for thy poor Handmaid!—And as thou sufferest not thy poor Creatures to be tempted above what they can bear; I will resign, thro’ thy Grace assisting me, to thy good Pleasure. But since these Temptations are not of my own seeking, the Effects of my Presumption and Vanity, O enable me to withstand them all, and deliver me from the Dangers that hang over my poor Head, and make me perfect thro’ Sufferings, and, in thy own good Time, deliver me from them!</p>
				<p>Thus do I pray, imperfectly as I am forced by my distracting Fears and Apprehensions; and O join with me, my dear Parents!—But, alas! how can you know, how can I reveal to you, the dreadful Situation of your poor Daughter! The unhappy <strong>Pamela</strong> may be undone, (which God forbid, and sooner deprive me of Life!) before you can know my hard Lot!</p>
				<p>O the unparallel’d Wickedness, and Stratagems, and Devices of those who call themselves Gentlemen, and pervert the Design of Providence, in giving them ample Means to do good, to their own Perdition, and to the Ruin of poor oppressed Innocence!</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>But let me tell you what has befallen me; and yet, How shall you receive it? For I have now no honest <strong>John</strong> to carry my Letters to you; but am likely to be watch’d in all my Steps, till my hard Fate ripens his wicked Projects for my Ruin. I will every Day now write my sad State; and some way, perhaps, may be open’d to send the melancholy Scribble to you. But if you know it, what will it do but aggravate your Troubles: For, Oh! what can the abject Poor do against the mighty Rich, when they are determin’d to oppress?</p>
				<p>Well, but I will proceed to write what I had hoped to tell you in a few Hours, that I believed I should be blessed by you on my Return to you, from so many Hardships.</p>
				<p>I will begin here with my Account from the last Letter I wrote you, in which I inclosed my poor Stuff of Verses, and continue it at times, as I have Opportunity; tho’ as I said, I know not how it can reach you now.</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>The long hop’d-for <strong>Thursday</strong> Morning came, that I was to set out. I had taken my Leave of my Fellow-servants over-night; and a mournful Leave it was to us all: For Men, as well as Women-servants, wept much to part with me; and, for my Part, I was over-whelm’d with Tears, and the Instances of their Esteem. They all would have made me little Presents, as Tokens of their Love; but I would not take any thing from the lower Servants, to be sure. But Mr. <strong>Longman</strong> made me a present of several Yards of <strong>Holland</strong>, and a silver Snuff-box, and a gold Ring, which he desir’d me to keep for his sake; and he wept over me; but said, I am sure, so good a Maiden God will bless; and tho’ you return to your poor Father again, and his low Estate; yet Providence will find you out, and one Day, tho’ I mayn’t live to see it, you will be rewarded.</p>
				<p>I said, O dear Mr. <strong>Longman</strong>, you make me too rich, and too mody; and yet I must be a Beggar before my Time: For I shall want often to be scribbling, (little thinking it would be my only Employment so soon) and I will beg you, Sir, to favour me with some Paper; and as soon as I get home, I will write you a Letter, to thank you for all your Kindness to me; and a Letter to good Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> too.</p>
				<p>This was lucky; for I should have had none else, but at pleasure of my rough-natur’d Governess, as I may call her; but now I can write to ease my Mind, tho’ I can’t send it to you; and write what I please, for she knows not how well I am provided. For good Mr. <strong>Longman</strong> gave me above forty Sheets of Paper, and a dozen Pens, and a little Phial of Ink; which last I wrapt in Paper, and put in my Pocket; and some Wax and Wafers.</p>
				<p>O dear Sir, said I, you have set me up. How shall I requite you? He said, By a Kiss, my fair Mistress; and I gave it very willingly; for he is a good old Man.</p>
				<p><strong>Rachel</strong> and <strong>Hannah</strong> cry’d sadly when I took my Leave, and <strong>Jane</strong>, who sometimes used to be a little crossish, and <strong>Cicely</strong> too, wept sadly, and said they would pray for me; but poor <strong>Jane</strong>, I doubt, seldom says her Prayers for herself: More’s the pity!</p>
				<p>Then <strong>Arthur</strong> the Gardener, our <strong>Robin</strong> the Coachman, and <strong>Lincolnshire Robin</strong> too, who was to carry me, were very civil; and both had Tears in their Eyes; which I thought then very good-natur’d in <strong>Lincolnshire Robin</strong>, because he knew but little of me.—But since, I find he might well be concern’d, for he had then his Instructions, it seems, and knew how he was to be a Means to intrap me.</p>
				<p>Then our other three Footmen, <strong>Harry, Isaac</strong>, and <strong>Benjamin</strong>, and Grooms, and Helpers too, were very much affected likewise; and the poor little Scullion-boy, <strong>Tommy</strong>, was ready to run over for Grief.</p>
				<p>They had got all together over-night, expecting to be differently imploy’d in the Morning; and they all begg’d to shake Hands with me, and I kiss’d the Maidens; and pray’d to God to bless them all; and thanked them for all their Love and Kindnesses to me: And indeed I was forced to leave them sooner than I would, because I could not stand it: indeed I could not! <strong>Harry</strong> (I could not have thought it, for he is a little wildish, they say) cry’d till he sobb’d again. <strong>John</strong>, poor honest <strong>John</strong>, was not then come back from you. But as for the Butler, Mr. <strong>Jonathan</strong>, he could not stay in Company.</p>
				<p>I thought to have told you a deal about this; but I have worse things to employ my Thoughts.</p>
				<p>Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, good Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, cry’d all Night long; and I comforted her all I could: and she made me promise, that if my Master went to <strong>London</strong> to attend Parliament, or to <strong>Lincolnshire</strong>, I would come and stay a Week with her. And she would have given me Money; but I would not take it.</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>Well, next Morning came, and I wonder’d I saw nothing of poor honest <strong>John;</strong> for I waited to take Leave of him, and thank him for all his Civilities to me and to you: But I suppose he was sent further by my Master, and so could not return; and I desired to be remember’d to him.</p>
				<p>And when Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> told me, with a sad Heart, the Chariot was ready, with four Horses to it, I was just upon sinking into the Ground, tho’ I wanted to be with you.</p>
				<p>My Master was above Stairs, and never asked to see me. I was glad of it in the main; but he knew, false Heart as he is! that I was not to be out of his Reach!—O preserve me, Heaven, from his Power, and from his Wickedness!</p>
				<p>Well, they were not suffer’d to go with me one Step, as I writ you before; for he stood at the Window to see me go. And in the Passage to the Gate, out of his Sight, there they stood all of them, in two Rows; and we could say nothing on both sides, but God bless you! and God bless you! But <strong>Harry</strong> carried my own Bundle, my third Bundle, as I was used to call it, to the Coach, and some Plum-cakes, and Diet-bread, made for me over-night, and some Sweet-meats, and six Bottles of Canary Wine, which Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> would make me take in a Basket, to chear our Hearts now-and-then when we got together, as she said. And I kiss’d all the Maids again, and shook Hands with the Men again; but Mr. <strong>Jonathan</strong> and Mr. <strong>Longman</strong> were not there; and tript down Steps to the Chariot, Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> crying most sadly.</p>
				<p>I look’d up when I got to the Chariot, and I saw my Master at the Window, in his Gown; and I curchee’d three times to him very low, and pray’d for him with my Hands lifted up, for I could not speak; and he bow’d his Head to me, which made me then very glad he would take such Notice of me; and in I stept, and was ready to burst with Grief; and could only, till <strong>Robin</strong> begun to drive, wave my white Handkerchief to them, wet with my Tears: And at last away he drove, Jehu-like<mark class="reference" id="ref9"><a href="#note9">9</a></mark> as they say, out of the Court-yard; and I too soon found I had Cause for greater and deeper Grief.</p>
				<p>Well, says I to myself, at this rate I shall soon be with my dear Father and Mother; and till I had got, as I supposed, half way, I thought of the good Friends I had left. And when, on stopping for a little Bait to the Horses, <strong>Robin</strong> told me, I was near half-way, I thought it was high time to wipe my Eyes, and think to whom I was going; as then, alack for me! I thought. So I began to ponder what a Meeting I should have with you; how glad you’d both be to see me come safe and innocent to you, after all my Dangers; and so I began to comfort myself, and to banish the other gloomy Side from my Mind; tho’ too it return’d now-and-then; for I should be ingrateful not to love them for their Love.</p>
				<p>Well, I believe, I sat out about Eight o’Clock in the Morning; and I wonder’d, and wonder’d, when it was about Two, as I saw by a Church-dyal in a little Place we pass’d thro’, that I was still more and more out of my Knowledge. Hey-day! thinks I, to drive this strange Pace, and to be so long a-going little more than twenty Miles, is very odd! But, to be sure, thought I, <strong>Robin</strong> knows the Way.</p>
				<p>At last he stopt, and look’d about him, as if he was at a Loss for the Way; and I said, Mr. <strong>Robert</strong>, sure you are out of the Way!—I’m afraid I am, said he. But it can’t be much; I’ll ask the first Person I see. Pray do, said I; and he gave his Horses a Mouthful of Hay; and I gave him some Cake, and two Glasses of Canary Wine; and stopt about half an Hour in all. Then he drove on very fast again.</p>
				<p>I had so much to think of, of the Dangers I now doubted not I had escaped, of the loving Friends I had left, and my best Friends I was going to, and the many things I had to relate to you, that I the less thought of the Way, till I was startled out of my Meditations by the Sun beginning to set, and still the Man driving on, and his Horses sweating and foaming; and then I begun to be alarm’d all at once, and called to him; and he said, he had horrid ill Luck; for he had come several Miles out of the Way, but was now right, and should get in still before it was quite dark. My Heart began then to misgive me a little; and I was very much fatigued; for I had no Sleep for several Nights before to signify; and at last, I said, Pray, Mr. <strong>Robert</strong>, there is a Town before us, What do you call it?—If we are so much out of the Way, we had better put up there; for the Night comes on apace; and, Lord protect me! thought I, I shall have new Dangers, may-hap, to encounter with the Man, who have escaped the Master?—Little thinking of the base Contrivance of the latter. Says he, I am just there; ’tis but a Mile on one side of the Town before us.—Nay, said I, I may be mistaken, for it is a good while since I was this way; but I am sure the Face of the Country here is nothing like what I remember it.</p>
				<p>He pretended to be much out of Humour with himself for mistaking the Way, and at last stopt at a Farm-house, about two Miles beyond the Village I had seen, and it was then almost dark, and he alighted, and said, We must make shift here; for I am quite out.</p>
				<p>Lord, thought I, be good to the poor <strong>Pamela!</strong> More Tryals still!—What will befal me next?</p>
				<p>The Farmer’s Wife, and Maid, and Daughter, came out, and said, What brings you this way at this time of Night, Mr. <strong>Robert?</strong> And with a Lady too?—Then I began to be frighten’d out of my Wits; and laying Middle and both Ends together, I fell a-crying, and said, God give me Patience! I am undone for certain!—Pray, Mistress, said I, do you know Esquire <strong>B</strong>. of <strong>Bedfordshire?</strong></p>
				<p>The wicked Coachman would have prevented the answering me; but the simple Daughter said, Know his Worship! yes, surely! why he is my Father’s Landlord!—Well, said I, then I am undone, undone for ever!—O wicked Wretch! what have I done to you, said I to the Coachman, to serve me thus?—Vile Tool of a wicked Master! Faith, said the Fellow, I’m sorry this Task was put upon me; But I could not help it. But make the best of it now; Here are very civil, reputable Folks; and you’ll be safe here, I’ll assure you.—Let me get out, said I, and I’ll walk back to the Town we came thro’, late as it is!—For I will not enter here.</p>
				<p>Said the Farmer’s Wife, You’ll be very well used here, I’ll assure you, young Gentlewoman, and have better Conveniencies than any where in the Village. I matter not Conveniencies, said I, I am betray’d and undone! As you have a Daughter of your own, pity me, and let me know, if your Landlord, as you call him, be here!—No, I’ll assure you, he is not, said she.</p>
				<p>And then came the Farmer, a good-like sort of Man, grave, and well-behav’d; and he spoke to me in such sort, as made me a little more pacify’d; and seeing no Help for it, I went in; and the Wife immediately carry’d me up Stairs to the best Apartment, and told me that was mine as long as I staid; and nobody should come near me but when I called! I threw myself on the Bed in the Room, tir’d, and frighten’d to Death almost, and gave way to the most excessive Fit of Grief that I ever had!</p>
				<p>The Daughter came up, and said, Mr. <strong>Robert</strong> had given her a Letter to give me; and there it was. I raised myself, and saw it was the Hand and Seal of the wicked Wretch my Master, directed To Mrs. <strong>Pamela Andrews</strong>.—This was a little better than to have him here; tho’ if he had, he must have been brought thro’ the Air; for I thought I was.</p>
				<p>The good Woman (for I begun to see things about a little reputable, and no Guile appearing in them, but rather a Face of Grief for my Grief) offered me a Glass of some cordial Water, which I accepted, for I was ready to sink; and then I sat up in a Chair a little, tho’ very faintish: And they brought me two Candles, and lighted a Brushwood Fire; and said, if I call’d, I should be waited upon instantly, and so left me to ruminate on my sad Condition, and to read my Letter, which I was not able to do presently. After I had a little come to myself, I found it to contain these Words:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Dear <strong>Pamela</strong>,</p>
						<p class="first"><span class="first-word">The</span> Passion I have for you, and your Obstinacy, have constrained me to act by you in a manner that I know will occasion you great Trouble and Fatigue, both of Mind and Body. Yet, forgive me, my dear Girl; for tho’ I have taken this Step, I will, by all that’s good and holy, use you honourably. Suffer not your Fears to transport you to a Behaviour that will be disreputable to us both. For the Place where you’ll receive this, is a Farm that belongs to me; and the People civil, honest and obliging.</p>
						<p>You will be by this time far on your way to the Place I have allotted for your Abode for a few Weeks, ’till I have manag’d some Affairs, that will make me shew myself to you in a much different Light than you may possibly apprehend from this rash Action. And to convince you that I mean you no Harm, I do assure you, that the House you are going to, shall be so much at your Command, that even I myself will not approach it without Leave from you. So make yourself easy; be discreet and prudent; and a happier Turn shall reward these your Troubles, than you may at present apprehend.</p>
						<p>Mean time I pity the Fatigue you will have, if this comes to your hand in the Place I have directed. And will write to your Father, to satisfy him, that nothing but what is honourable shall be offer’d to you, by</p>
						<p class="signature">Your passionate Admirer, (so I must style myself)——</p>
						<div class="postscript">
							<p>Don’t think hardly of poor <strong>Robin</strong>: You have so possess’d all my Servants in your Favour, that I find they had rather serve you than me; and ’tis reluctantly the Fellow undertook this Task; and I was forced to submit to assure him of my honourable Intentions to you, which I am fully resolved to make good, if you compel me not to a Conduct abhorrent to me at present.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>I but too well apprehended, that this Letter was only to pacify me for the present; but as my Danger was not so immediate as I had reason to dread, and he had promised to forbear coming to me, and to write to you, my dear Parents, to quiet your Concern, I was a little more easy than I was before: And I made shift to eat a little Bit of boil’d Chicken they had got for me, and drank a Glass of my Sack, and made them do so too.</p>
				<p>But after I had so done, I was again a little fluster’d; for in came the Coachman with the Look of a Hangman, I thought, and Mad-am’d me up strangely; telling me, he would beg me to get ready to pursue my Journey by Five in the Morning, or else he should be late in. I was quite griev’d at this; for I began not to dislike my Company, considering how Things stood, and was in hopes to get a Party among them, and so to put myself into any worthy Protection in the Neighbourhood, rather than go forward.</p>
				<p>When he withdrew, I began to tamper with the Farmer and his Wife. But, alas! they had had a Letter deliver’d them at the same time I had; so securely had <strong>Lucifer</strong> put it into his Head to do his Work; and they only shook their Heads, and seem’d to pity me; and so I was forced to give over that Hope.</p>
				<p>However, the good Farmer shew’d me his Letter; which I copy’d as follows: For it shews the deep Arts of this wicked Master; and how resolv’d he seem’d on my Ruin, by the Pains he took to deprive me of all Hopes of freeing myself from his Power.</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Farmer <strong>Norton</strong>,</p>
						<p clas="first">I Send to your House, <strong>for one Night only</strong>, a young Gentlewoman, much against her Will, who has deeply imbark’d in a Love Affair, which will be her Ruin, as well as the Person’s to whom she wants to betroth herself. I have, <strong>to oblige her Father</strong>, order’d her to be carry’d to one of my Houses, where she will be well us’d, to try if by Absence, and Expostulation with both, they can be brought to know their own Interest. And I am sure you will use her kindly for my sake. For excepting this Matter, <strong>which she will not own</strong>, she does not want Prudence and Discretion. I will acknowledge any Trouble you shall be at in this Matter, the first Opportunity, and am</p>
						<p class="signature">Your Friend and Servant.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>He had said, too cunningly for me, that I would not own this pretended Love Affair; so that he had provided them not to believe me, say what I would; and as they were his Tenants, who all love him, (for he has some good Qualities, and so he had need!) I saw all my Plot cut out; and so was forc’d to say the less.</p>
				<p>I wept bitterly, however; for I saw he was too hard for me, as well in his Contrivances as Riches; and so had Recourse again to my only Refuge, that God who takes the innocent Heart into his Almighty Protection, and is alone able to baffle and confound the Devices of the Mighty. Nay, the Farmer was so prepossess’d with the Contents of his Letter to him, that he began to praise his Care and Concern for me, and to advise me against entertaining Addresses without my Friends Advice and Consent, and made me the Subject of a Lesson for his Daughter’s Improvement. So I was glad to shut up this Discourse; for I saw I was not likely to be believ’d.</p>
				<p>I sent, however, to tell my Driver, that I was so fatigued, I could not set out so soon the next Morning. But he insisted upon it, and said it would make my Day’s Journey the lighter; and I found he was a more faithful Servant to his Master, notwithstanding what he wrote of his Reluctance, than I could have wish’d: So I saw still more and more, that all was deep Dissimulation, and Contrivance worse and worse.</p>
				<p>Indeed I might have shewn them his Letter to me as a full Confutation of his to them; but I saw no Probability of engaging them in my Behalf; and so thought it signify’d little, as I was to go away so soon, to enter more particularly into the Matter with them; and besides, I saw they were not inclinable to let me stay longer for fear of disobliging him; so I went to Bed, but had very little Rest; and they would make their Servant-maid bear me Company in the Chariot five Miles, early in the Morning, and she was to walk back.</p>
				<div class="small-break" />
				<p>I had contriv’d in my Thoughts, when I was on my Way in the Chariot, on <strong>Friday</strong> Morning, that when we came into some Town, to bait, as he must do for the Horses sake, that I would at the Inn apply myself, if I saw I any way could, to the Mistress of the Inn, and tell her the Case, and refuse to go further, having nobody but this wicked Coachman to contend with.</p>
				<p>Well, I was very full of this Project, and was in great Hopes, some how or other, to extricate myself this way. But Oh! the artful Wretch had provided for even this last Resource of mine; for when we came to put up at a large Town on the Way, to eat a Morsel for Dinner, and I was fully resolv’d to execute my Project, who should be at the Inn that he put up at, but the wicked Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> expecting me, and her Sister-in-law was the Mistress of it; and she had provided a little Entertainment for me.</p>
				<p>And this I found, when I desir’d, as soon as I came in, to speak with the Mistress of the House. She came to me, and I said, I am a poor unhappy young Body that wants your Advice and Assistance, and you seem to be a good sort of Gentlewoman, that would assist an oppressed innocent Person. Yes, Madam, said she, I hope you guess right, and I have the Happiness to know something of the Matter before you speak. Pray call my Sister <strong>Jewkes</strong>.—<strong>Jewkes! Jewkes!</strong> thought I, I have heard of that Name; I don’t like it.</p>
				<p>Then the wicked Creature appear’d, whom I had never seen but once before, and I was terrify’d out of my Wits. No Stratagem, thought I, not one! for a poor innocent Girl; but every thing to turn out against me; that is hard indeed!</p>
				<p>So I began to pull in my Horns, as they say; for I saw I was now worse off than at the Farmer’s.</p>
				<p>The naughty Woman came up to me with an Air of Confidence, and kiss’d me, See, Sister, said she, here’s a charming Creature! would not she tempt the best Lord in the Land to run away with her! O frightful, thought I! here’s an Avowal of the Matter at once! I am now gone, that’s certain! And so was quite silent and confounded; and seeing no Help for it, (for she would not part with me out of her Sight) I was forc’d to set out with her in the Chariot; for she came thither on Horseback with a Man-servant, who rode by us the rest of the Way, with her Horse; and now I gave over all Thoughts of Redemption, and was in a desponding Condition indeed.</p>
				<p>Well, thought I, here are strange Pains taken to ruin a poor innocent, helpless, and even worthless young Body. This Plot is laid too deep, and has been too long a hatching to be baffled, I fear. But then I put my Trust in God, who I knew was able to do every thing for me, when all other possible Means should fail: And in Him I was resolv’d to confide.</p>
				<p>You may see!—Yet, oh! that kills me, for I know not whether ever you may see what I now write, or no!—Else you may see, what sort of Woman this Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> is, compar’d to good Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, by this—</p>
				<p>Every now-and-then she would be staring in my Face, in the Chariot, and squeezing my Hand, and saying, Why, you are very pretty, my silent Dear! and once she offer’d to kiss me. But I said, I don’t like this Sort of Carriage, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>; it is not like two Persons of one Sex.</p>
				<p>She fell a laughing very confidently, and said, That’s prettily said, I vow; then thou hadst rather be kiss’d by the other Sex? Ifackins, I commend thee for that! I was sadly teaz’d with her Impertinence, and bold Way; but no wonder, she was an Inn-keeper’s House-keeper before she came to my Master; and those Sort of Creatures don’t want Confidence, you know. And indeed she made nothing to talk confidently on twenty Occasions, and said two or three times, when she saw the Tears every now-and-then, as we rid, trickle down my Cheeks, I was sorely hurt, truly, to have the handsomest and finest young Gentleman in five Counties in Love with me!</p>
				<p>So I find I am got into the Hands of a wicked Procuress, and if I was not safe with good Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, and where every body lov’d me, what a dreadful Prospect have I now before me, in the Hands of a Woman that seems to delight in Filthiness!</p>
				<p>O dear Sirs! what shall I do! What shall I do!—Surely, I shall never be equal to all these Things!</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>About Eight at Night, we enter’d the Court-yard of this handsome, large, old, and lonely Mansion, that looks made for Solitude and Mischief, as I thought, by its Appearance, with all its brown nodding Horrors of lofty Elms and Pines about it; And here, said I to myself, I fear, is to be the Scene of my Ruin, unless God protect me, who is all-sufficient!</p>
				<p>I was very sick at entering it, partly from Fatigue, and partly from Dejection of Spirits: And Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> got me some mull’d Wine, and seem’d mighty officious to welcome me thither. And while she was absent, ordering the Wine, the wicked <strong>Robin</strong> came in to me, and said, I beg a thousand Pardons for my Part in this Affair, since I see your Grief, and your Distress, and I do assure you, that I am sorry it fell to my Task.</p>
				<p>Mighty well, Mr. <strong>Robert!</strong> said I; I never saw an Execution but once, and then the Hangman ask’d the poor Creature’s Pardon, and wip’d his Mouth, as you do, and pleaded his Duty, and then calmly tuck’d up the Criminal: But I am no Criminal, as you all know: And if I could have thought it my Duty to obey a wicked Master, in his unlawful Commands, I had sav’d you all the Merit of this vile Service.</p>
				<p>I am sorry, said he, you take it so. But every body don’t think alike. Well, said I, you have done your Part, Mr. <strong>Robert</strong>, towards my Ruin, very faithfully; and will have Cause to be sorry, may-be, at the Long-run, when you shall see the Mischief that comes of it.—Your Eyes were open, and you knew I was to be carry’d to my Father’s, and that I was barbarously trick’d and betray’d, and I can only once more, thank you for your Part of it. God forgive you!</p>
				<p>So he went away a little sad. What have you said to <strong>Robin</strong>, Madam, said Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, who came in as he went out? The poor Fellow’s ready to cry. I need not be afraid of your following his Example, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I: I have been telling him, that he has done his Part to my Ruin: And he now can’t help it! So his Repentance does me no good; I wish it may him.</p>
				<p>I’ll assure you, Madam, said she, I should be as ready to cry as he, if I should do you any Harm. It is not in his Power to help it now, said I; but your Part is to come, and you may chuse whether you’ll contribute to my Ruin or not.—Why, look ye, look ye, Madam, said she, I have a great Notion of doing my Duty to my Master; and therefore you may depend upon it, if I can do that, and serve you, I will: But you must think, if your Desire and his Will come to clash once, I shall do as he bids me, let it be what it will.</p>
				<p>Pray, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I, don’t Madam me so; I am but a silly poor Girl, set up by the Gambol of Fortune, for a May-game; and now am to be something, and now nothing, just as that thinks fit to sport with me: And let you and I talk upon a Foot together; for I am a Servant inferior to you, and so much the more as I am turn’d out of Place.</p>
				<p>Ay, ay, says she, I understand something of the Matter; you have so great Power over my Master, that you may be soon Mistress of us all; and so I would oblige you, if I could. And I must and will call you Madam; for I am instructed to shew you all Respect, I’ll assure you.</p>
				<p>Who instructed you to do so, said I? Who! my Master, to be sure, said she. Why, said I, how can that be, you have not seen him lately. No, that’s true, said she; but I have been expecting you here some time (O! the deep-laid Wickedness thought I!) and besides, I have a Letter of Instructions by <strong>Robin</strong>; but may-be, I should not have said so much. If you would shew them to me, said I, I should be able to judge how far I could, or could not, expect Favour from you, consistent with your Duty to our Master. I beg your Pardon, fair Mistress, for that, said she; I am sufficiently instructed, and you may depend upon it, I will observe my Orders; and so far as they will let me, so far will I oblige you; and there’s an End of it.</p>
				<p>Well, said I, you will not, I hope, do an unlawful or wicked Thing, for any Master in the World! Look-ye, said she, he is my Master, and if he bids me do a Thing that I can do, I think I ought to do it, and let him, who has Power, to command me, look to the Lawfulness of it. Why, said I, suppose he should bid you cut my Throat, would you do it? There’s no Danger of that, said she; but to be sure I would not; for then I should be hang’d; for that would be Murder. Well, said I, and suppose he should resolve to insnare a poor young Creature, and ruin her, would you assist him in that? For to rob a Person of her Virtue, is worse than cutting her Throat.</p>
				<p>Why now, says she, how strangely you talk! Are not the two Sexes made for one another? And is it not natural for a Gentleman to love a pretty Woman? And suppose he can obtain his Desires, is that so bad as cutting her Throat? And then the Wretch fell a laughing, and talk’d most impertinently, and shew’d me, that I had nothing to expect from her Virtue or Conscience. And this gave me great Mortification; for I was in hopes of working upon her by degrees.</p>
				<p>So we ended our Discourse here, and I bid her shew me where I must lie?—Why, said she, lie where you list, Madam; but I can tell you, I must lie with you for the present. <strong>For the present</strong>, said I, and Torture then wrung my Heart!—But is it in your Instructions that you must lie with me? Yes, indeed, said she. I am sorry for it, said I. Why, said she, I am wholsome and cleanly too, I’ll assure you. Yes, said I, I don’t doubt that; but I love to lie by myself. Why, said she, Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> was your Bed-fellow at t’other House.</p>
				<p>Well, said I, quite sick of her, and my Condition, you must do as you are instructed, I think. I can’t help myself; and am a most miserable Creature. She repeated her insufferable Nonsense, Mighty miserable indeed, to be so well belov’d by one of the finest Gentlemen in <strong>England!</strong></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
			<p class="note" id="note9"><a href="#ref9">9.)</a> Likely a reference to the biblical Jehu, described in 2 Kings as leading a revolt against the king of Israel Joram, in part for nationalizing the worship of a golden calf (heresy). In the climactic confrontation between Jehu and Joram, the Joram's lookout is able to identify Jehu becuase he "driveth furiously" (KJV, 2 Kgs 9.20). Entering the city, Jehu finds Joram's mother, Jezebel. Anticipating her death, she appears dresses luxiourly. The sight enrages Jehu, who blames her for witchcraft and heresy. With a simple command he convinces her servants to throw her out a window to the street where she is run over by chariots and eaten by dogs.</p>
			</div>
</body>
</html>