<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Pamela, Or Virtue Rewarded (A CUNY Student Edition)</title>
  <link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>

<body>
					<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle">I am now come down in my Writing to this present <strong>Saturday</strong>, and a deal I have written.</h2>
				<p class="first">My wicked Bed-fellow has very punctual Orders it seems; for she locks me and herself in, and ties the two Keys (for there is a double Door to the Room) about her Wrist, when she goes to Bed. She talks of the House having been attempted to be broke open two or three times; whether to fright me, I can’t tell; but it makes me fearful; but not so much as I should be, if I had not other and greater Fears.</p>
				<p>I slept but little the preceding Night, and got up, and pretended to sit by the Window, which looks into the spacious Gardens; but I was writing all the time, from Break of Day to her getting up, and after, when she was absent.</p>
				<p>At Breakfast she presented the two Maids to me, the Cook and House-maid, poor awkward Souls, that I can see no Hopes of, they seem so devoted to her and Ignorance. Yet I am resolv’d if possible, to find some way to escape, before this wicked Master comes.</p>
				<p>There are besides, of Servants, the Coachman <strong>Robert</strong>, a Groom, a Helper, a Footman; all but <strong>Robert</strong> (and he is accessary to my Ruin) strange Creatures, that promise nothing; and all likewise devoted to this Woman. The Gardener looks like a good honest Man; but he is kept at a Distance; and seems reserv’d.</p>
				<p>I wonder’d I saw not Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> the Clergyman, but would not ask after him, apprehending it might give her some Jealousy; but when I had beheld the rest, he was the only one I had Hopes of; for I thought his Cloth would set him above assisting in my Ruin.—But, in the Afternoon he came; for it seems he has a little <strong>Latin</strong> School in the neighbouring Village, which he attends, and this brings him in a little Matter, additional to my Master’s Favour, till something better falls, of which he has Hopes.</p>
				<p>He is a sensible, sober young Gentleman, and when I saw him, I confirm’d myself in my Hopes of him; for he seem’d to take great Notice of my Distress and Grief; for I could not hide it; tho’ he appear’d fearful of Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, who watch’d all our Motions and Words.</p>
				<p>He has an Apartment in the House; but is mostly at a Lodging in the Town, for Conveniency of his little School; only on <strong>Saturday</strong> Afternoons and <strong>Sundays</strong>; and he preaches sometimes for the Parson of the Village, which is about three Miles off.</p>
				<p>I hope to go to Church with him to-morrow: Sure it is not in her Instructions to deny me. He can’t have thought of every thing. And something may strike out for me there.</p>
				<p>I have ask’d her, for a Feint, (because she shan’t think I am so well provided) to indulge me with Pen and Ink, tho’ I have been using my own so freely when her Absence would let me; for I begg’d to be left to myself as much as possible. She says she will let me have it, but then I must promise not to send any Writing out of the House, without her seeing it. I said, It was only to divert my Grief, when I was by myself, as I desired to be; for I lov’d Writing; but I had nobody to send to, she knew well enough.</p>
				<p>No, not at present, may-be, said she; but I am told you are a great Writer, and it is in my Instructions to see all you write; so, look you here, said she, I will let you have a Pen and Ink, and two Sheets of Paper; for this Employment will keep you out of worse Thoughts: but I must see them always when I ask, written or not written. That’s very hard, said I; but may I not have the Closet in the Room where we lie, to myself, with the Key to lock up my Things? I believe I may consent to that, said she, and I will set it in Order for you, and leave the Key in the Door. And there is a Spinnet too, said she; if it be in Tune, you may play to divert you now-and-then; for I know my old Lady learnt you.</p>
				<p>So I resolv’d to hide a Pen of my own here, and another there, for fear I should come to be deny’d, and a little of my Ink in a broken China Cup, and a little in another Cup; and a Sheet of Paper here-and-there among my Linen, with a little Wax and a few Wafers in several Places, lest I should be search’d; and something I thought might happen to open a Way for my Deliverance, by these or some other Means. O the Pride, thought I, I shall have, if I can secure my Innocence, and escape the artful Wiles of this wicked Master! For, if he comes hither, I am undone to be sure! For this naughty Woman will assist him, rather than fail, in the worst of his Attempts, and he’ll have no Occasion to send her out of the Way, as he would have done Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> once. So I must set all my little Wits at Work!</p>
				<p>It is a Grief to me to write, and not to be able to send to you what I write; but now it is all the Diversion I have, and if God will favour my Escape with my Innocence, as I trust he graciously will, for all these black Prospects, with what Pleasure shall I read them afterwards!</p>
				<p>I was going to say, Pray for your dutiful Daughter, as I used; but, alas! you cannot know my Distress! tho’ I am sure I have your Prayers. And I will write on as Things happen, that if a Way should open, my Scribble may be ready to send. For what I do, must be at a Jirk, to be sure.</p>
				<p>O how I want such an obliging honest-hearted Man <strong>as John!</strong></p>
			</div>
			<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle">I am now come to <strong>Sunday</strong>.</h2>
				<p class="first">Well, here is a sad Thing! I am deny’d by this barbarous Woman, to go to Church, as I had built upon I might. And she has huffed poor Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> all to pieces, for pleading for me. I find he is to be forbid the House, if she pleases. Poor Gentleman! all his Dependence is upon my Master, who has a very good Living for him, if the Incumbent die, and he has kept his Bed these four Months, of old Age and Dropsy.</p>
				<p>He pays me great Respect; and I see pities me; and would perhaps assist my Escape from these Dangers, but I have nobody to plead for me; and why should I wish to ruin a poor Gentleman, by engaging him against his Interest? Yet one would do any thing to preserve one’s Innocence; and God Almighty would, may-be, make it up to him!</p>
				<p>O judge (but how shall you see what I write!) my distracted Condition, to be reduc’d to such a Pass as to desire to lay Traps for Mankind!—But he wants sadly to say something to me, as he whisperingly hinted.</p>
				<p>The Wretch (I think I will always call her the <strong>Wretch</strong> henceforth) abuses me more and more. I was but talking to one of the Maids just now, indeed a little to tamper with her by degrees; and she popt upon us, and said—Nay, don’t offer, Madam, to tempt poor innocent Country Maidens from doing their Duty. You wanted, I hear, she should take a Walk with you. But I charge you, <strong>Nan</strong>, never stir with her, nor obey her, without letting me know it, in the smallest Trifles.—I say, walk with you! why, where would you go, I trow? Why, barbarous Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I, only to look a little up the Elm-walk, as you would not let me go to Church.</p>
				<p><strong>Nan</strong>, said she, to shew me how much they were all in her Power, pull off Madam’s Shoes, and bring them to me. I have taken care of her others—Indeed she shan’t, said I—Nay, said <strong>Nan</strong>, but I must, if my Mistress bids me; so pray, Madam, don’t hinder me: And so indeed, (would you believe it?) she took my Shoes off, and left me barefoot: And, for my Share, I have been so frighten’d at this, that I have not Power even to relieve my Mind by my Tears. I am quite stupify’d, to be sure! Here I was forc’d to leave off.</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>Now I will give you a Picture of this Wretch! She is a broad, squat, pursy, fat Thing, quite ugly, if any thing God made can be ugly; about forty Years old. She has a huge Hand, and an Arm as thick as my Waist, I believe. Her Nose is flat and crooked, and her Brows grow over her Eyes; a dead, spiteful, grey, goggling Eye, to be sure, she has. And her Face is flat and broad; and as to Colour, looks like as if it had been pickled a Month in Saltpetre: I dare say she drinks!—She has a hoarse man-like Voice, and is as thick as she’s long; and yet looks so deadly strong, that I am afraid she would dash me at her Foot in an Instant, if I was to vex her.—So that with a Heart more ugly than her Face, she frightens me sadly; and I am undone, to be sure, if God does not protect me; for she is very, very wicked—indeed she is.</p>
				<p>This is but poor helpless Spight in me!—But the Picture is too near the Truth notwithstanding. She sends me a Message just now, that I shall have my Shoes again, if I will accept of her Company to walk with me in the Garden—To <strong>waddle</strong> with me, rather, thought I.</p>
				<p>Well, ’tis not my Business to quarrel with her downright. I shall be watch’d the narrower, if I do; and so I will go with the hated Wretch.—O for my dear Mrs. <strong>Jervis!</strong> or rather, to be safe with my dear Father and Mother!</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>Oh I’m out of my Wits, for Joy! Just as I have got my Shoes on, I am told, <strong>John</strong>, honest <strong>John</strong>, is come, on Horseback!—God bless him! What Joy is this! But I’ll tell you more by-and-by. I must not let her know, I am so glad to see this dear blessed <strong>John</strong>, to be sure!—O but he looks sad, as I see him out of the Window! What can be the Matter!—I hope my dear Parents are well, and Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, and Mr. <strong>Longman</strong>, and every body, my naughty Master not excepted—for I wish him to live and repent of all his Wickedness to poor me.</p>
				<p>O dear Heart! what a World do we live in!—I am now to take up my Pen again! But I am in a sad Taking truly! Another puzzling Tryal, to be sure!</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>Here is <strong>John</strong>, as I said; and the poor Man came to me, with Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, who whisper’d, that I would say nothing about the Shoes, for my own sake, as she said. The poor Man saw my Distress, and my red Eyes, and my haggard Looks, I suppose; for I had had a sad Time of it, you must needs think; and he would have hid it, but his Eyes run over. Oh Mrs. <strong>Pamela!</strong> said he; Oh Mrs. <strong>Pamela!</strong>—Well, honest Fellow-servant, said I, I cannot help it at present! I am oblig’d to your Honesty and Kindness, to be sure; and then he wept more. Said I, (for my Heart was ready to break to see his Grief; for it is a touching thing to see a Man cry) Tell me the worst! Is my Master coming? No, no, said he, and sobb’d.—Well, said I, is there any News of my poor Father and Mother? how do they do?—I hope, well, said he; I know nothing to the contrary: There is no Mishap, I hope, to Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, or Mr. <strong>Longman</strong>, or my Fellow-servants! No—said he, poor Man! with a long N—o, as if his Heart would burst. Well, thank God then! said I.</p>
				<p>The Man’s a Fool, said Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, I think; what ado is here! why sure thou’rt in Love, <strong>John</strong>. Dost thou not see young Madam is well? what ails thee, Man? Nothing at all, said he, but I am such a Fool, as to cry for Joy to see good Mrs. <strong>Pamela</strong>: But I have a Letter for you.</p>
				<p>I took it, and saw it was from my Master; so I put it in my Pocket. Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I, you need not, I hope, see this. No, no, said she, I see who it comes from, well enough; or else, may-be, I must desire to see it.</p>
				<p>And here is one for you, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said he; but yours, said he to me, requires an Answer, which I must carry back early in the Morning, or to-night, if I can.</p>
				<p>You have no more, <strong>John</strong>, said Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, for Mrs. <strong>Pamela</strong>, have you? No, said he, I have not. But every body’s kind Love and Service. Ay, to us both, to be sure, said she. <strong>John</strong>, said I, I will read the Letter, and pray take care of yourself; for you are a good Man. God bless you; and I rejoice to see you, and hear from you all. But I long’d to say more, only that nasty Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>—</p>
				<p>So I came up hither, and lock’d myself in my Closet, and open’d the Letter; and this is a Copy of it.</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">My dearest <strong>Pamela</strong>,</p>
						<p class="first">I Send purposely to you on an Affair that concerns you very much, and me something, but chiefly for your sake. I am conscious that I have proceeded by you in such a manner as may justly alarm your Fears, and give Concern to your honest Friends: And all my Pleasure is, that I can and will make you Amends for all the Disturbance I have given you. As I promis’d, I sent to your Father the Day after your Departure, that he might not be too much concern’d for you, and assured him of my Honour to you; and made an Excuse, such a one as ought to have satisfy’d him, for your not coming to him. But this was not sufficient, it seems; for he, poor Man! came to me next Morning, and set my Family almost in an Uproar about you.</p>
						<p>O my dear Girl, what Trouble has not your Obstinacy given me, and yourself too! I had no way to pacify him, but to promise, that he should see a Letter wrote from you to Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, to satisfy him you were well.</p>
						<p>Now all my Care in this Case, is for your aged Parents, lest they should be fatally touched with Grief; and for you, whose Duty and Affection for them I know to be so strong and laudable: For this Reason I beg you will write a few Lines to them, and let me prescribe the Form for it; which I have done, putting myself as near as I can in your Place, and expressing your Sense, with a Warmth that I doubt will have too much possess’d you.</p>
						<p>After what is done, and which cannot now be help’d, but which, I assure you, shall turn out honourably for you, I expect not to be refus’d; because I cannot possibly have any View in it, but to satisfy your Parents; which is more your Concern than mine; and so I must <a id="page_117"></a>beg you will not alter one Tittle of the underneath. If you do, it will be impossible for me to send it, or that it should answer the good End I propose by it.</p>
						<p>I have promis’d to you, that I will not approach you without your Leave: If I find you easy, and not attempting to dispute or avoid your present Lot, I will keep to my Word, tho’ ’tis a Difficulty upon me. Nor shall the present Restraint upon you last long: For I will assure you, that I am resolv’d very soon to convince you, how ardently I am</p>
						<p class="signature">Yours, &amp;c.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The Letter he prescribed for me was this:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p class="salutation">Dear Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>,</p>
						<p class="first">I Have, instead of being driven, by <strong>Robin</strong>, to my dear Father’s, been carry’d off, to where I have no Liberty to tell. However, at present, I am not us’d hardly; and I write to beg you to let my dear Father and Mother, whose Hearts must be well-nigh broken, know, that I am well; and that I am, and, by the Grace of God, ever will be, their dutiful and honest Daughter, as well as</p>
						<p class="signature">Your obliged Friend.</p>
						<div class="postscript">
							<p>I must neither send Date nor Place; but have most solemn Assurances of honourable Usage.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>I knew not what to do on this most strange Request and Occasion. But my Heart bled so much for you, my dear Father, who had taken the Pains to go yourself and inquire after your poor Daughter, as well as for my dear Mother, that I resolv’d to write, and pretty much in the above Form, that it might be sent to pacify you, till I could let you, some how or other, know the true State of the Matter. And I wrote this to this strange wicked Master himself:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<p class="salutation">Sir,</p>
					<p class="first"><span class="first-word">If</span> you knew but the Anguish of my Mind, and how much I suffer by your dreadfully strange Usage of me, you would surely pity me, and consent to my Deliverance. What have I done, that I should be the only Mark of your Cruelty! I can possibly have no Hope, no Desire of living left me, because I cannot have the least Dependence, after what has pass’d, upon your solemn Assurances—It is impossible, surely, they should be consistent with the honourable Designs you profess.</p>
					<p>Nothing but your Promise of not seeing me here in my deplorable Bondage, can give me the least Ray of Hope.</p>
					<p>Don’t drive the poor distressed <strong>Pamela</strong> upon a Rock, I beseech you, that may be the Destruction both of her Body and Soul! You don’t know, Sir, how dreadfully I <strong>dare</strong>, weak as I am of Mind and Intellect, when my Virtue is in Danger. And, oh! hasten my Deliverance, that a poor unworthy Creature, below the Notice of so great a Man, may not be made the Sport of a high Condition, for no Reason in the World, but because she is not able to defend herself, nor has a Friend that can right her.</p>
					<p>I have, Sir, in part to shew my Obedience to you, but indeed, I own, more to give Ease to the Minds of my poor distressed Parents, whose Poverty, one would think, should screen them from Violences of this sort, as well as their poor Daughter, follow’d pretty much the Form you have prescrib’d for me, to Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>; and the Alterations I have made, (for I could not help a few) are of such a Nature, as, tho’ they shew my Concern a little, yet must answer the End you are pleas’d to say you propose by this Letter.</p>
					<p>For God’s sake, good Sir, pity my lowly Condition, and my present great Misery; and let me join with all the rest of your Servants to bless that Goodness, which you have extended to every one, but the poor afflicted, heart-broken</p>
					<p class="signature"><strong>Pamela</strong>.</p>
				</div>
				<p>I thought, when I had written this Letter, and that which he had prescrib’d, it would look like placing a Confidence in Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, to shew them to her; and I shew’d her at the same time my Master’s Letter to me; for I believ’d, the Value he express’d for me, would give me Credit with one who profess’d in every thing to serve him right or wrong; tho’ I had so little Reason, I fear, to pride myself in it: And I was not mistaken; for it has seem’d to influence her not a little, and she is at present mighty obliging, and runs over in my Praises; but is the less to be minded, because she praises as much the Author of all my Miseries, and his honourable Intentions, as she calls them; when I see, that she is capable of thinking, as I fear <strong>he</strong> does, that every thing that makes for his wicked Will, is honourable, tho’ to the Ruin of the Innocent. Pray God I may find it otherwise. I hope, whatever the naughty Gentleman may intend, that I shall be at least rid of her impertinent bold Way of Talk, when she seems to think, by his Letter, that he means honourably.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle">I am now come to <strong>Monday</strong>, the 5th Day of my Bondage and Misery.</h2>
				<p class="first">I Was in Hope to have an Opportunity to see <strong>John</strong>, and have a little private Talk with him before he went away; but it could not be. The poor Man’s excessive Sorrow made Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> take it into her Head, to think he lov’d me, and so she brought up a Message to me from him this Morning, that he was going. I desir’d he might come up to my Closet, as I call’d it; and she came with him: And the honest Man, as I thought him, was as full of Concern as before, at taking Leave. And I gave him my two Letters, the one for Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, inclos’d in that for my Master: But Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> would see me seal them up, for fear of any other—I was surpriz’d, at the Man’s going away, to see him drop a Bit of Paper, just at the Head of the Stairs, which I took up without Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>’s seeing me; but I was a thousand times more surpriz’d, when I return’d to my Closet, and opening it, read as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="salutation">Good Mrs. <strong>Pamela</strong>,</p>
					<p class="first">I Am griev’d to tell you how much you have been deceiv’d and betray’d, and that by such a vile Dog as I. Little did I think it would come to this. But I must say, if ever there was a Rogue in the World, it is me. I have all along shew’d your Letters to my Master: He employ’d me for that Purpose; and he saw every one before your Father and Mother, and then seal’d them up, and sent me with them. I had some Business that way; but not half so often as I pretended. And as soon as I heard how it was with you, I was ready to hang myself. You may well think I could not stand in your Presence. O vile, vile Wretch, to bring you to this! If you are ruin’d, I am the Rogue that caus’d it. All the Justice I can do you, is, to tell you, you are in vile Hands; and I am afraid will be undone in spite of all your sweet Innocence; and I believe I shall never live after I know it. If you can forgive me, you are exceeding good; but I shall never forgive myself, that’s certain. Howsomever, it will do you no good to make this known; and may-hap I may live to do you Service. If I can, I will. I am sure I ought—Master kept your last two or three Letters, and did not send them at all. I am the most abandon’d Wretch of Wretches.</p>
					<p class="signature"><strong>J. Arnold</strong>.</p>
					<div class="postscript">
						<p>You see your Undoing has been long hatching. Pray take care of your sweet Self. Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> is a Devil. But in my Master’s t‘other House you have not one false Heart, but myself. Out upon me for a Villain!</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>My dear Father and Mother, when you come to this Place, I make no doubt your Hair will stand an End, as mine does!—O the Deceitfulness of the Heart of Man!—This <strong>John</strong>, that I took to be the honestest of Men; that you took for the same; that was always praising you to me, and me to you, and for nothing so much as for our honest Hearts; this very Fellow was all the while a vile Hypocrite, and a perfidious Wretch, and helping to carry on my Ruin!</p>
				<p>But he says enough of himself; and I can only sit down with this sad Reflection, That Power and Riches never want Tools to promote their vilest Ends, and that there is nothing so hard to be known as the Heart of Man!—Yet I can but pity the poor Wretch, since he seems to have some Remorse, and I believe it best to keep his Wickedness secret; and, if it lies in my way, to encourage his Penitence; for I may possibly make some Discoveries by it.</p>
				<p>One thing I should mention in this Place; he brought down, in a Portmanteau, all the Cloaths and Things my Lady and Master had presented me, and moreover two Velvet Hoods, and a Velvet Scarf, that used to be worn by my Lady; but I have no Comfort in them!</p>
				<p>Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> had the Portmanteau brought into my Closet, and she shew’d me what was in it; but then locked it up, and said, she would let me have what I would out of it, when I asked; but if I had the Key, it might set me a wanting to go abroad, may-be; and so the insolent Woman put it in her Pocket.</p>
				<p>I gave myself over to sad Reflections upon this strange and surprizing Discovery <strong>of John</strong>’s, and wept much for him, and for myself too; for now I see, as he says, my Ruin has been so long a hatching, that I can make no Doubt what my Master’s honourable Professions will end in. What a Heap of Names does the poor Fellow call himself! But what must they deserve, who set him to work? O what has this wicked Master to answer for, to be so corrupt himself, and to corrupt others, who would have been innocent; and all to carry on further a more corrupt Scene, and to ruin a poor Creature, who never did him Harm, nor wish’d him any; and who can still pray for his Happiness, and his Repentance?</p>
				<p>I can but wonder what these Gentlemen, as they are called, can think of themselves for these vile Doings? <strong>John</strong> had some Inducement; for he hoped to please his Master, who rewarded him, and was bountiful to him; and the same may be said, bad as she is, for this same odious Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>. But what Inducement has my Master for taking so much Pains to do the Devil’s Work?—If he loves me, as ’tis falsely called, must he therefore ruin me, and lay Traps for me, and endeavour to make me as bad as himself? I cannot imagine what good the Undoing of such a poor Creature as I can procure him!—To be sure, I am a very worthless Body. People indeed say I am handsome; but if I was so, should not a Gentleman prefer an honest Servant to a guilty Harlot?—And must he be <strong>more</strong> earnest to seduce me, because I dread of all things to be seduced, and would rather lose my Life than my Honesty!</p>
				<p>Well, these are strange things to me! I cannot account for them, for my Share; but sure nobody will say, that these fine Gentlemen have any Tempter but their own wicked Wills!—This naughty Master could run away from me, when he thought none but his Servants should know his base Attempts, in that sad Closet Affair; but is it not strange, that he should not be afraid of the All-seeing Eye, from which even that black poisonous Heart of his, and its most secret Motions, could not be hid?—But what avail me these sorrowful Reflections? He is and will be wicked; and I am, I fear, to be a Victim to his lawless Attempts, if the God in whom I trust, and to whom I hourly pray, prevent it not!</p>
			</div>
			<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle"><strong>Tuesday</strong> and <strong>Wednesday</strong>.</h2>
				<p class="first">I Have been hinder’d, by this wicked Woman’s watching me too close, from writing on <strong>Tuesday</strong>; and so I will put both these Days together. I have been a little Turn with her, for an Airing, in the Chariot, and walked several times in the Garden; but have always her at my Heels.</p>
				<p>Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> came to see us, and took a Walk with us once; and while her Back was just turn’d, (encourag’d by the Hint he had before given me) I said, Sir, I see two Tiles upon that Parsley-bed; cannot one cover them with Mould, with a Note between them, on Occasion?—A good Hint, said he; let that Sun-flower by the Backdoor of the Garden be the Place; I have a Key to that; for it is my nearest way to the Town.</p>
				<p>So I was forced to begin. O what Inventions will Necessity be the Parent of! I hugg’d myself with the Thought; and she coming to us, he said, as if he was continuing the Discourse we were in; No, not extraordinary pleasant. What’s that? what’s that? said Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>—Only, said he, the Town, I’m saying, is not very pleasant. No, indeed, said she, ’tis not; ’tis a poor Town, to my thinking. Are there any Gentry in it? said I. And so we chatted on about the Town, to deceive her. But my Deceit intended no Hurt to any body.</p>
				<p>We then talked of the Garden, how large and pleasant, and the like; and sat down on the turfted Slope of the fine Fish-pond, to see the Fishes play upon the Surface of the Water; and she said, I should angle if I would.</p>
				<p>I wish, said I, you’d be so kind to fetch me a Rod and Baits. Pretty Mistress! said she—I know better than that, I’ll assure you! at this time!—I mean no Harm, said I, indeed. Let me tell you, said she, I know nobody has their Thoughts more about them than you. A body ought to look to it, where you are. But we’ll angle a little to-morrow. Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, who is much afraid of her, turn’d the Discourse to a general Subject. I saunter’d in, and left them to talk by themselves; but he went away to Town, and she was soon after me.</p>
				<p>I had got to my Pen and Ink; and I said, I want some Paper (putting what I was about in my Bosom): You know I have wrote two Letters, and sent them by <strong>John</strong> (O how his Name, poor guilty Fellow! grieves me). Well, said she, you have some left; one Sheet did for those two Letters. Yes, said I, but I used half another for a Wrapper, you know; and see how I scribbled the other Half; and so I shewd her a Parcel of broken Scraps of Verses, which I had try’d to recollect, and which I had wrote purposely that she might see, and think me usually employ’d to such idle Purposes. Ay, said she, so you have; well, I‘ll give you two Sheets more; but let me see how you dispose of them, either written or blank. Well, thinks I, I hope still, <strong>Argus</strong>, to be too hard for thee. Now <strong>Argus</strong><mark class="reference" id="ref10"><a href="#note10">10</a></mark>, the Poets say, had an hundred Eyes, and was made to watch with them all, as she is.</p>
				<p>She brought me the Paper, and said, Now, Madam, let me see you write something. I will, said I; and took the Pen, and wrote, ‘I wish Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> would be as good to me, as I would be to her, if I had it in my Power!’—That’s pretty now! said she; well, I hope I am; but what then? ‘Why then (<strong>wrote I</strong>) she would do me the Favour to let me know, what I have done to be made her Prisoner; and what she thinks is to become of me.’ Well, and what then, said she? ‘Why then, of Consequence, (<strong>scribbled I</strong>) she would let me see her Instructions, that I may know how far to blame her, or acquit her.’</p>
				<p>Thus I fooled on, to shew her my Fondness for scribbling; for I had no Expectation of any Good from her; that so she might suppose I employ’d myself, as I said, to no better Purpose at other times: For she will have it, that I am upon some Plot, I am so silent, and love so much to be by myself.—She would have had me go on a little further. No, said I, you have not answer’d me. Why, said she, what can you doubt, when my Master himself assures you of his Honour? Ay, says I; but lay your Hand to your Heart, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, and tell me, if you yourself believe him. Yes, said she, to be sure I do. But, said I, what do you call Honour?—Why, said she, what does he call Honour, think you?—Ruin! Shame! Disgrace! said I, I fear!—Pho, pho, said she; if you have any Doubt about it, he can best explain his own Meaning!—I’ll send him word to come to satisfy you, if you will!—Horrid Creature! said I, all in a Fright!—Can’st thou not stab me to the Heart? I’d rather thou wouldst, than say such another Word!—But I hope there is no Thought of his coming.</p>
				<p>She had the Wickedness to say, No, no; he don’t intend to come, as I know of—But if I was he, I would not be long away!—What means the Woman, said I?—Means! said she (turning it off); why I mean, I would come, if I was he, and put an End to all your Fears—by making you as happy as you wish. ’Tis out of his Power, said I, to make me happy, great and rich as he is, but by leaving me innocent, and giving me Liberty to go to my dear Father and Mother.</p>
				<p>She went away soon after, and I ended my Letter, in Hopes to have an Opportunity to lay it in the appointed Place. So I went to her, and said; I suppose, as it is not dark, I may take another Turn in the Garden. ’Tis too late, said she; but if you will go, don’t stay, and, <strong>Nan</strong>, see and attend Madam, as she called me.</p>
				<p>So I went towards the Pond, the Wench following me, and dropt purposely my Hussy: And when I came near the Tiles, I said, Mrs. <strong>Ann</strong>, I have dropt my Hussy; be so kind to look for it. I had it by the Pond-side. The Wench went to look, and I slipt the Note between the Tiles, and cover’d them as quick as I could with the light Mould, quite unperceiv’d; and the Maid finding the Hussy, I took it, and saunter’d in again, and met Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> coming to see after me. What I wrote was this:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="salutation">Reverend Sir,</p>
					<p class="first"><span class="first-word">The</span> want of Opportunity to speak my Mind to you, I am sure will excuse this Boldness in a poor Creature that is betray’d hither, I have Reason to think, for the worst Purposes. You know something, to be sure, of my Story, my native Poverty, which I am not ashamed of, my late Lady’s Goodness, and my Master’s Designs upon me. ’Tis true, he promises Honour, and all that; but the Honour of the Wicked is Disgrace and Shame to the Virtuous. And he may think he may keep his Promises according to the Notions he may allow himself to hold; and yet, according to mine, and every good Body’s beside, quite ruin me.</p>
					<p>I am so wretched, and ill treated by this Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, and she is so ill-principled a Woman, that as I may soon want the Opportunity which the happy Hint of this Day affords to my Hopes; so I throw myself at once upon your Goodness, without the least Reserve; for I cannot be worse than I am, should <strong>that</strong> fail me; which, I dare say, to your Power, it will not: For I see it, Sir, in your Looks, I hope it from your Cloth, and I doubt it not from your Inclination, in a Case circumstanced as my unhappy one is. For, Sir, in helping me out of my present Distress, you perform all the Acts of Religion in one; and the highest Mercy and Charity, both to a Body and a Soul of a poor Wretch, that, believe me, Sir, has, at present, not so much as in Thought, swerv’d from her Innocence.</p>
					<p>Is there not some way to be found out for my Escape, without Danger to yourself? Is there no Gentleman or Lady of Virtue in this Neighbourhood, to whom I may fly, only till I can find a way to get to my poor Father and Mother? Cannot Lady <strong>Davers</strong> be made acquainted with my sad Story, by your conveying a Letter to her? My poor Parents are so low in the World, they can do nothing but break their Hearts for me; and that, I fear, will be the End of it.</p>
					<p>My Master promises, if I will be easy, as he calls it, in my present Lot, he will not come down without my Consent. Alas! Sir, this is nothing. For what’s the Promise of a Person, who thinks himself at Liberty to act as he has done by me? If he comes, it must be to ruin me; and come, to be sure, he will, when he thinks he has silenc’d the Clamours of my Friends, and lulled me, as no doubt he hopes, into a fatal Security.</p>
					<p>Now, therefore, Sir, is all the Time I have to work and struggle for the Preservation of my Honesty. If I stay till he comes, I am undone. You have a Key to the back Garden-door; I have great Hopes from that. Study, good Sir, and contrive for me. I will faithfully keep your Secret.—Yet I should be loth to have you injur’d for me!</p>
					<p>I say no more, but commit this to the happy Tiles, and to the Bosom of that Earth from which I hope my Deliverance will take Root, and bring forth such Fruit, as may turn to my inexpressible Joy, and your eternal Reward, both here and hereafter. As shall ever pray,</p>
					<p class="signature">Your most oppressed humble Servant.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle"><strong>Thursday</strong></h2>
				<p class="first"><span class="first-word">This</span> completes a fatal Week since my setting out, as I hoped, to see you, my dear Father and Mother. O how different my Hopes then, from what they are now! Yet who knows what these happy Tiles may produce!</p>
				<p>But I must tell you, first, how I have been beaten by Mrs. <strong>Jewkes!</strong> ’Tis very true!</p>
				<p>My Impatience was great to walk in the Garden, to see if any thing had offer’d, answerable to my Hopes. But this wicked Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> would not let me go without her; and she said she was not at Leisure. We had a great many Words about it; for I said, it was very hard I could not be trusted to walk by myself in the Garden for a little Air; but must be dogg’d and watch’d worse than a Thief.</p>
				<p>She still pleaded her Instructions, and said she was not to trust me out of her Sight: And you had better, said she, be easy and contented, I assure you. For I have worse Orders than you have yet found; and if you remember, said she, what you said when Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> was with us, asking if there were any Gentry in the Neighbourhood, it makes me suspect you want to get away to them, to tell your sad dismal Story, as you call it.</p>
				<p>My Heart was at my Mouth; for I fear’d by that Hint, she had seen my Letter under the Tiles: O how uneasy I was! At last she said, Well, since you take on so, you may take a Turn, and I will be with you in a Minute.</p>
				<p>I went out; and when I was out of the Sight of her Window, I speeded towards the hopeful Place; but was soon forced to slacken my Pace, by her odious Voice; Hey-day, why so nimble, and so fast? said she: What! are you upon a Wager? I stopt for her, till her pursy Sides were waddled up to me; and she held by my Arm, half out of Breath: So I was forced to pass by the dear Place, without daring to look at it.</p>
				<p>The Gardener was at work a little further, and so we looked upon him, and I began to talk about his Art; but she said softly, My Instructions are, not to let you be so familiar with the Servants. Why, said I, are you afraid I should confederate with them to commit a Robbery upon my Master? May-be I am, said the odious Wretch; for to rob him of yourself, would be the worst that could happen to him, in his Opinion.</p>
				<p>And pray, said I, walking on, how came I to be his Property? What Right has he in me, but such as a Thief may plead to stolen Goods?—Why, was ever the like heard, says she!—This is downright Rebellion, I protest! Well, well, Lambkin, (which the Foolish often calls me) if I was in his Place, he should not have his Property in you long questionable. Why, what would you do, said I, if you was he?—Not stand shill-I, shall-I, as he does; but put you and himself both out of your Pain.—Why, <strong>Jezebel</strong><mark id="ref11" class="reference"><a href="#note11">11</a></mark>, said I, (I could not help it); would you ruin me by Force?—Upon this she gave me a deadly Slap upon my Shoulder: Take that, said she; who do you call <strong>Jezebel?</strong></p>
				<p>I was so scar’d, (for you never beat me, my dear Father and Mother, in your Lives) that I was as one thunder-struck; and looked round, as if I wanted somebody to help me; but, alas! I had nobody; and said, at last, rubbing my Shoulder, Is this too in your Instructions?—Alas! for me! am I to be beaten too? and so I fell a crying, and threw myself upon the Grass-walk we were upon.—Said she, in a great Pet, I won’t be call’d such Names, I’ll assure you. Marry come up! I see you have a Spirit! You must and shall be kept under. I’ll manage such little provoking Things as you, I warrant ye! Come, come, we’ll go in Doors, and I’ll lock you up, and you shall have no Shoes, nor any thing else, if this is to be the Case!</p>
				<p>I didn’t know what to do. This was a cruel thing to me, and I blam’d myself for my free Speech; for now I had given her some Pretence; and Oh! thinks I, here I have, by my Malapertness, ruin’d the only Project I had left.</p>
				<p>The Gardener saw this Scene; but she called to him, Well, <strong>Jacob</strong>, what do you stare at! Pray mind what you’re upon. And away he walk’d, to another Quarter, out of Sight.</p>
				<p>Well, thinks I, I must put on the Dissembler a little, I see. She took my Hand roughly; Come, get up, said she, and come in Doors.—I’ll <strong>Jezebel</strong> you, I warrant ye!—Why, dear Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I—None of your Dears and your Coaxing, said she; why not <strong>Jezebel</strong> again!—She was in a fearful Passion, I saw, and I was half out of my Wits. Thinks I, I have often heard Women blam’d for their Tongues; I wish mine had been shorter. But I can’t go in, said I, indeed I can’t!—Why, said she, can’t you? I‘ll warrant I can take such a thin Body as you are under my Arm, and carry you in, if you won’t walk. You don’t know my Strength—Yes, but I do, said I, too well; and will you not use me worse when I come in?—So I arose, and she mutter’d to herself all the way, She to be a <strong>Jezebel</strong> with me, that had used me so well! and such-like.</p>
				<p>When I came near the House, I said, sitting down upon a Settle-bench, Well, I will not go in, till you say, you will forgive me, Mrs. <strong>Jemkes</strong>—If you will forgive my calling you that Name, I will forgive your beating me—She sat down by me, and seem’d in a great Pucker, and said, Well, come, I will forgive you for this time; and so kissed me, as a Mark of Reconciliation—But pray, said I, tell me where I am to walk, and go, and give me what Liberty you can; and when I know the most you can favour me with, you shall see I will be as content as I can; and not ask you for more.</p>
				<p>Why, said she, that’s something like: I wish I could give you all the Liberty you desire; for you must think it is no Pleasure to me to tie you to my Petticoat, as it were, and not to let you stir without me—But People that will do their Duties, must have some Trouble; and what I do, is to serve as good a Master, to be sure, as lives—Ay, says I, to every body but me!—He loves you too well, to be sure, said she, and that’s the Reason; so you ought to bear it. I say, <strong>love</strong>, said I! Come, said she, don’t let the Wench see you have been crying, nor tell her any Tales; for you won’t tell them fairly, I am sure; and I’ll send her, and you shall take another Walk in the Garden, if you will. May-be, said she, it will get you a Stomach to your Dinner; for you don’t eat enough to keep Life and Soul together. You are Beauty to the Bone, said the strange Wretch, or you could not look so well as you do, with so little Stomach, so little Rest, and so much pining and whining for nothing at all. Well, thought I, say what thou wilt, so I can be rid of thy bad Tongue and Company: And I hop’d to find some Opportunity now, to come at my Sun-flower. But I walked the other way, to take that in my Return, to avoid Suspicion.</p>
				<p>I forced my Discourse to the Wench; but it was all upon general things; for I find she is asked after every thing I say and do. When I came near the Place, as I had been devising, I said, Pray, step to the Gardener, and ask him to gather a Sallad for me to Dinner. She called out, <strong>Jacob!</strong>—Said I, he can’t hear you so far off; and pray tell him, I should like a Cucumber too, if he has one. When she had stept about a Bow-shot from me, I popt down, and whipt my Fingers under the upper Tile, and pulled out a little Letter, without Direction, and thrust it in my Bosom, trembling for Joy. She was with me before I could well secure it; and I was in such a taking, that I feared I should discover myself. You seem frighted, Madam, said she: Why, said I, with a lucky Thought, (alas! your poor Daughter will make an Intriguer by-and-by; but I hope an innocent one!) I stoopt to smell at the Sun-flower, and a great nasty Worm run into the Ground, that startled me; for I don’t love Worms. Said she, Sun-flowers don’t smell. So I find, said I. And so we walked in; and Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> said, Well, you have made haste in—You shall go another time.</p>
				<p>I went up to my Closet, lock’d myself in, and opening my Letter, found in it these Words:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="first">I Am infinitely concern’d for your Distress. I most heartily wish it may be in my Power to serve and save so much Innocence, Beauty and Merit. My whole Dependence is upon the ’Squire; and I have a near View of being provided for by his Goodness to me. But yet, I would sooner forfeit all my Hopes upon him, and trust in God for the rest, than not assist you, if possible. I never look’d upon Mr. <strong>B</strong>. in the Light he now appears to me in, in your Case. To be sure, he is no profess’d Deboshee. But I am intirely of Opinion, you should, if possible, get out of his Hands, and especially as you are in very bad ones in Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>’s.</p>
					<p>We have here the Widow Lady <strong>Jones</strong>, Mistress of a good Fortune, and a Woman of Virtue, I believe. We have also old Sir <strong>Simon Darnford</strong>, and his Lady, who is a good Woman; and they have two Daughters. All the rest are but middling People, and Traders, at best. I will try, if you please, either Lady <strong>Jones</strong>, or Lady <strong>Darnford</strong>, if they will permit you to take Refuge with them. I see no Probability of keeping myself conceal’d in this Matter; but will, as I said, risque all things to serve you; for I never saw a Sweetness and Innocence like yours; and your hard Case has attached me intirely to you; for I know, as you so happily express, if I can serve you in this Case, I shall thereby perform all the Acts of Religion in one.</p>
					<p>As to Lady <strong>Davers</strong>, I will convey a Letter, if you please, to her; but it must not be from our Post-house, I give you Caution; for the Man owes all his Bread to the ’Squire, and his Place too; and I believe, by something that dropt from him, over a Can of Ale, has his Instructions. You don’t know how you are surrounded; all which confirms me in your Opinion, that no Honour is meant you, let what will be professed; and I am glad you want no Caution on that Head.</p>
					<p>Give me Leave to say, that I had heard much in your Praise, both as to Person and Mind; but I think greatly short of what you deserve: My Eyes convince me of the one, your Letter of the other. For fear of losing the present lucky Opportunity, I am longer than otherwise I should be. But I will not inlarge, only to assure you, that I am, to the best of my Power,</p>
					<p class="signature">Your faithful Friend and Servant,<br/>
						<strong>Arthur Williams</strong>.</p>
					<div class="postscript">
						<p>I will come once every Morning, and once every Evening, after School-time, to look for your Letters. I’ll come in, and return without going into the House, if I see the Coast clear: Otherwise, to avoid Suspicion, I’ll come in.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>I instantly, to this pleasing Letter, wrote as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="salutation">Reverend Sir,</p>
					<p class="first">O How answerable to your Function, and your Character, is your kind Letter! God bless you for it. I now think I am beginning to be happy. I should be sorry you should suffer on my Account; but I hope it will be made up to you an hundred-fold, by that God whom you so faithfully serve. I should be too happy, could I ever have it in my Power to contribute in the least to it. But, alas! to serve me, must be for God’s sake only; for I am poor and lowly in Fortune; though in Mind, I hope, too high to do a mean or unworthy Deed, to gain a Kingdom. But I lose Time.</p>
					<p>Any way you think best, I shall be pleased with; for I know not the Persons, nor in what manner it is best to apply to them. I am glad of the Hint you so kindly give me of the Man at the Post-house. I was thinking of opening a way for myself by Letter, when I could have Opportunity; but I see more and more, that I am indeed strangely surrounded with Dangers; and that there is no Dependence to be made on my Master’s Honour.</p>
					<p>‘I should think, Sir, if either of those Ladies would give Leave, I might some way get out by Favour of your Key; and as it is impossible, watched as I am, to know when it can be, suppose, Sir, you could get one made by it, and put it, by the next Opportunity, under the Sun-flower?—I am sure no Time is to be lost; because it is rather my Wonder, that she is not thoughtful about this Key, than otherwise; for she forgets not the minutest thing. But, Sir, if I had this Key, I could, if these Ladies would <strong>not</strong> shelter me, run away anywhere. And if I was once out of the House, they could have no Pretence to force me in again; for I have done no Harm, and hope to make my Story good to any compassionate Body; and by this way <strong>you</strong> need not be known. Torture should not wring it from me, I assure you.</p>
					<p>‘One thing more, good Sir. Have you no Correspondence with my Master’s Family? By that means, may-be, I could be informed of his Intentions of coming hither, and when. I inclose you a Letter of a deceitful Wretch; for I can trust you with any thing, poor <strong>John Arnold</strong>. Its Contents will tell why I inclose it. Perhaps, by his means something may be discover’d; for he seems willing to atone for his Treachery to me, by the Intimation of future Service. I leave the Hint for you to improve upon, and am, Reverend Sir,</p>
					<p class="signature">Your for ever obliged and thankful Servant.</p>
					<div class="postscript">
						<p>I hope, Sir, by your Favour, I could send a little Packet, now-and-then, some how, to my poor Father and Mother. I have a little Stock of Money, about five or six Guineas: Shall I put half in your Hands, to defray a Man and Horse, or any other Incidents?</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>I had time but just to transcribe this, before I was called to Dinner; and I put that for Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, with a Wafer in it, in my Bosom, to get an Opportunity to lay it in the dear Place.</p>
				<p>O good Sirs! Of all the Flowers in the Garden, the Sun-flower, sure, is the loveliest!—It is a propitious one to me! How nobly my Plot succeeds! But I begin to be afraid my Writings may be discover’d; for they grow large! I stitch them hitherto in my Under-coat, next my Linen. But if this Brute should search me!—I must try to please her, and then she won’t.</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>Well, I am but just come off from a Walk in the Garden; and have deposited my Letter by a simple Wile. I got some Horse-beans; and we took a Turn in the Garden, to angle, as Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> had promis’d me. She baited the Hook, and I held it, and soon hooked a lovely Carp. Play it, play it, said she; I did, and brought it to the Bank. A sad Thought just then came into my Head; and I took it, and threw it in again; and O the Pleasure it seem’d to have, to flounce in, when at Liberty!—Why this? says she. O Mrs. <strong>Jewkes!</strong> said I, I was thinking this poor Carp was the unhappy <strong>Pamela</strong>. I was likening you and myself to my naughty Master. As we hooked and deceived the poor Carp, so was I betrayed by false Baits; and when you said, Play it, play it, it went to my Heart, to think I should sport with the Destruction of the poor Fish I had betray’d; and I could not but fling it in again: And did you not see the Joy with which the happy Carp flounced from us! O! said I, may some good merciful Body procure me my Liberty in the same manner; for, to be sure, I think my Danger equal!</p>
				<p>Lord bless thee! said she, what a Thought is there!—Well, said I, I can angle no more. I’ll try <strong>my</strong> Fortune, said she, and took the Rod. Well, said I, I will plant Life then, if I can, while you are destroying it. I have some Horse-beans here, and I’ll go and stick them into one of the Borders, to see how long they will be coming up; and I will call them my Garden.</p>
				<p>So you see, dear Father and Mother (I hope now you will soon see; for, may-be, if I can’t get away so soon myself, I may send my Papers, some how) I say, you will see, that this furnishes me a good Excuse to look after my Garden another time; and if the Mould should look a little freshish, it won’t be so much suspected. She mistrusted nothing of this; and I went and stuck in here and there my Beans, for about the Length of five Ells, of each side of the Sun-flower; and easily reposited my Letter. And not a little proud am I of this Contrivance. Sure something will do at last. God grant it!</p>
			</div>
			<div class="section">
				<h2 class="subtitle"><strong>Friday, Saturday</strong></h2>
				<p class="first">I Have just now told you a Trick of mine; now I’ll tell you a Trick of this wicked Woman’s. She comes up to me; says she, I have a Bill I cannot change till to-morrow; and a Tradesman wants his Money most sadly; and I don’t love to turn poor Tradesfolks away without their Money: Have you any about you? How much will do, said I? I have a little! Oh! said she, I want eight Pounds. Alack, said I, I have but between five and six. Lend me that, said she, till to-morrow. I did so; and she went down Stairs: And when she came up, she laugh’d, and said, Well, I have paid the Tradesman: Said I, I hope you’ll give it me again to-morrow. At that, the Assurance, laughing loud, said, Why, what Occasion have you for Money? To tell you the Truth, Lambkin, I didn’t want it. I only fear’d you might make a bad Use of it; and now I can trust <strong>Nan</strong> with you a little oftener, especially as I have got the Key of your Portmanteau; so that you can neither corrupt her with Money or fine things. Never did any body look more silly than I!—O how I fretted to be so foolishly outwitted!—And the more, as I had hinted to Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, to have some to defray the Charges of my sending to you. I cry’d for Vexation!—And now I have not five Shillings left to support me, if I <strong>can</strong> get away!—Was ever such a Fool as I! I must be priding myself in my Contrivances indeed! Said I, was this in your Instructions, <strong>Wolfkin?</strong> for she called me <strong>Lambkin</strong>. <strong>Jezebel</strong>, you mean, Child, said she!—Well, I now forgive you heartily; let’s buss, and be Friends!—Out upon you, said I! I cannot bear you. But I durst not call her Names again; for I dread her huge Paw most sadly. The more I think of this thing, the more do I regret it!</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>This Night the Man from the Post-house brought a letter for Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, in which was one inclosed to me: She brought it me up. Said she, Well, my good Master don’t forget us. He has sent you a Letter; and see what he writes to me. So she read, That he hoped her fair Charge was well, happy, and contented: Ay to be sure, said I, I can’t chuse!—That he did not doubt her Care and Kindness to me; that I was very dear to him, and she could not use me too well; and the like. There is a Master for you, said she! Sure you will love and pray for him. I desir’d her to read the rest. No, no, said she, but I won’t. Said I, Are there any Orders for taking my Shoes away, and for beating me? No, said she, nor about <strong>Jezebel</strong> neither. Well, said I, I cry Truce; for I have no mind to be beat again. I thought, said she, we had forgiven one another.</p>
				<p>My Letter is as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="salutation">My dearest <strong>Pamela</strong>,</p>
					<p class="first">I Begin to repent already, that I have bound myself, by Promise, not to see you till you give me Leave; for I think the Time very tedious. Can you place so much Confidence in me, as to invite me down? Assure yourself that your Generosity shall not be thrown away upon me. I the rather would press this, as I am uneasy for your Uneasiness; for Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> acquaints me that you take your Restraint very heavily; and neither eat, drink, nor rest well; and I have too great an Interest in your Health, not to wish to shorten the Time of this Trial to you; which will be the Consequence of my coming down to you. <strong>John</strong> too, has intimated to me your Concern, with a Grief that hardly gave him Leave for Utterance; a Grief that a little alarm’d my Tenderness for you. Not that I fear any thing, but that your Disregard to me, which yet my proud Heart will hardly permit me to own, may throw you upon some Rashness, that might encourage a daring Hope: But how poorly do I descend, to be anxious about such a Menial as he?—I will only say one thing, that if you will give me Leave to attend you at the Hall, (consider who it is that requests this from you as a Favour) I solemnly declare, that you shall have Cause to be pleased with this obliging Mark of your Confidence in me, and Consideration for me; and if I find Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> has not behaved to you with the Respect due to one I so dearly love, I will put it intirely into your Power to discharge her the House, if you think proper; and Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong>, or who else you please, shall attend you in her place. This I say on a Hint <strong>John</strong> gave me, as if you resented something from that Quarter. Dearest <strong>Pamela</strong>, answer favourably this earnest Request of one that cannot live without you, and on whose Honour to you, you may absolutely depend; and so much the more, as you place a Confidence in it. I am, and assuredly ever will be,</p>
					<p class="signature">Your faithful and affectionate, <strong class="clear">&amp;c.</strong></p>
					<div class="postscript">
						<p>You will be glad, I know, to hear your Father and Mother are well, and easy upon your last Letter. That gave me a Pleasure that I am resolved you shall not repent. Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> will convey to me your Answer.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>I but slightly read this Letter for the present, to give way to one I had hopes of finding by this time, from Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>. I took, in Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>’s Company, an Evening Turn, as I call’d it, and walking by the Place, I said, Do you think Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, any of my Beans can have struck since Yesterday? She laugh’d, and said, You are a poor Gardener; but I love to see you divert yourself. She passing on, I found my good Friend had provided for me, and slipping it in my Bosom, for her Back was towards me, Here, said I, having a Bean in my Hand, is one of them; but it was not stirr’d. No, to be sure, said she; and turn’d upon me a most wicked Jest, unbecoming the Mouth of a Woman, about Planting, <strong>&amp;c</strong>.—When I came in, I hy’d to my Closet, and read as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote letter">
					<p class="first"><span class="first-word">I am</span> sorry to tell you, that I have a Repulse from Lady <strong>Jones</strong>. She is concerned at your Case, she says, but don’t care to make herself Enemies. I apply’d to Lady <strong>Darnford</strong>, and told her in the most pathetick manner I could, your sad Story, and shew’d her your more pathetick Letter. I found her well dispos’d; but she would advise with Sir <strong>Simon</strong>, who, by-the-bye, is not a Man of extraordinary Character for Virtue; but he said to his Lady, in my Presence, Why, what is all this, my Dear, but that the ’Squire our Neighbour has a mind to his Mother’s Waiting-maid? And if he takes care she wants for nothing, I don’t see any great Injury will be done her. He hurts no Family by this.’ (So, my dear Father and Mother, it seems that poor Peoples Honesty is to go for nothing). ’And I think, Mr. <strong>Williams</strong>, you, of all Men, should not engage in this Affair, against your Friend and Patron. He spoke this in so determin’d a manner, that the Lady had done; and I had only to beg no Notice should be taken of the Matter as from me.</p>
					<p>I have hinted your Case to Mr. <strong>Peters</strong>, the Minister of this Parish, but I am concern’d to say, that he imputed selfish Views to me, as if I would make an Interest in your Affections, by my Zeal. And when I represented the Duties of our Function, <strong>&amp;c</strong>. and protested my Disinterestedness, he coldly said, I was very good; but was a young Man, and knew little of the World. And tho’ ’twas a Thing to be lamented, yet when he and I set about to reform the World in this respect, we should have enough upon our Hands; for, he said, it was too common and fashionable a Case to be withstood by a private Clergyman or two: And then he utter’d some Reflections upon the Conduct of the Fathers of the Church, in regard to the first Personages of the Realm, as a Justification of his Coldness on this score.</p>
					<p>I represented the different Circumstances of your Affair; that other Women liv’d evilly by their own Consent, but to serve you, was to save an Innocence that had but few Examples; and then I shew’d him your Letter.</p>
					<p>He said, It was prettily written; and he was sorry for you; and that your good Intentions ought to be encourag’d; but what, said he, would you have me do, Mr. <strong>Williams?</strong> Why, suppose Sir, said I, you give her Shelter in your House, with your Spouse and Niece, till she can get to her Friends?—What, and imbroil myself with a Man of the ’Squire’s Power and Fortune! No, not I, I’ll assure you!—And he would have me consider what I was about. Besides, she owns, said he, that he promises to do honourably by her; and her Shyness will procure her good Terms enough; for he is no covetous nor wicked Gentleman; except in this Case; and ’tis what all young Gentlemen will do.</p>
					<p>I am greatly concern’d for him, I assure you; but am not discourag’d by this ill Success, let what will come of it, if I can serve you.</p>
					<p>I don’t hear, as yet, that the ’Squire is coming; I am glad of your Hint as to that unhappy Fellow <strong>John Arnold</strong>; something, perhaps, will strike out from that, which may be useful. As to your Pacquets, if you seal them up, and lay them in the usual Place, if you find it not mistrusted, I will watch an Opportunity to convey them; but if they are large, you had best be very cautious. This evil Woman, I find, mistrusts me much.</p>
					<p>I just hear that the Gentleman is dying, whose Living the ’Squire has promis’d me. I have almost a Scruple of taking it, as I am acting so contrary to his Desires; but I hope he’ll one Day thank me for it. As to Money, don’t think of it at present. Be assured you may command all in my Power to do for you, without Reserve.</p>
					<p>I believe, when we hear he is coming, it will be best to make use of the Key, which I shall soon procure you; and I can borrow a Horse for you, I believe, to wait within half a Mile of the Back-Door, over the Pasture; and will contrive by myself, or somebody, to have you conducted some Miles distant, to some one of the Villages thereabouts; so don’t be discomforted, I beseech you. I am, excellent Mrs.<strong> Pamela</strong>,</p>
					<p class="signature">Your faithful Friend, <strong class="clear">&amp;c.</strong></p>
				</div>
				<p>I made a thousand sad Reflections upon the former Part of this honest Gentleman’s kind Letter; and but for the Hope he gave me at last, should have given up my Case as quite desperate. I then wrote to thank him most gratefully for his kind Endeavour; to lament the little Concern the Gentry had for my deplorable Case; the Wickedness of the World to first give way to such iniquitous Fashions, and then plead the Frequency of them against the Offer to amend them; and how unaffected People were to the Distresses of others. I recall’d my former Hint as to writing to Lady <strong>Davers</strong>, which I fear’d, I said, would only serve to apprize her Brother, that she knew his wicked Scheme, and more harden him in it, and make him come down the sooner, and to be the more determin’d on my Ruin; besides, that it might make Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> guess’d at, as a means of conveying my Letter; and being very fearful, that if that good Lady would interest herself in my Behalf, (which was a Doubt, because she both lov’d and fear’d her Brother) it would have no Effect upon him; and that, therefore, I would wait the happy Event I might hope for from his kind Assistance in the Key and the Horse, <strong>&amp;c</strong>. I intimated my Master’s Letter, begging to be permitted to come down; was fearful it might be sudden; and that I was of Opinion no Time was to be lost; for we might lose all our Opportunities, <strong>&amp;c</strong>. telling him the Money-trick of this vile Woman, <strong>&amp;c</strong>.</p>
				<p>I had not time to take a Copy of this Letter, I was so watch’d. But when I had it ready in my Bosom, I was easy. And so I went to seek out Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, and told her I would have her Advice upon the Letter I had receiv’d from my Master, which Point of Confidence in her, pleas’d her not a little. Ay, said she, now this is something like. Why, we’ll take a Turn in the Garden, or where you please. I pretended it was indifferent to me; and so we walk’d into the Garden. I began to talk to her of the Letter; but was far from acquainting her with all the Contents; only that he wanted my Consent to come down, and hop’d she us’d me kindly, <strong>&amp;c</strong>. And I said, Now, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, let me have your Advice as to this. Why then, said she, I will give it you freely. E’en send to him to come down. It will highly oblige him, and I dare say you’ll fare the better for it. How the better? said I---I dare say, you think yourself that he intends my Ruin. I hate, said she, that foolish Word; <strong>your Ruin!</strong>―Why ne’er a Lady in the Land may live happier than you, if you will, or be more honourably used.</p>
				<p>Well, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, said I, I shall not at this time dispute with you about the Words <strong>Ruin</strong> or <strong>honourable</strong>. I thank God, we have quite different Notions of both; but now I will speak plainer than ever I did. Do you think he intends to make Proposals to me, as to a kept Mistress, or kept Slave rather; or do you not?---Why, Lambkin, said she, what dost thou think thyself?---I fear, said I, he does. Well, said she, but if he does, for I know nothing of the Matter, I assure you; you may have your own Terms---I see that; for you may do any thing with him.</p>
				<p>I could not bear this to be spoken, tho’ it was all I fear’d of a long time; and began to exclaim most sadly. Nay, said she, he may marry you, as far as I know.—No, no, said I, that cannot be—I neither desire nor expect it. His Condition don’t permit me to have such a Thought, and that, and the whole Series of his Conduct to me, convinces me of the contrary; and you would have me invite him to come down, would you? Is not this to invite my Ruin?</p>
				<p>’Tis what I would do, said she, in your Place; and if it was to be as you <strong>think</strong>, I should rather be out of my Pain, than live in continual Frights and Apprehensions, as you do. No, said I, an Hour of Innocence is worth an Age of Guilt; and were my Life to be made ever so miserable by it, I should never forgive myself, if I were not to lengthen out to the longest Minute my happy Time of Honesty. Who knows what God may do for me!</p>
				<p>Why, may-be, said she, as he loves you so well, you may prevail upon him by your Prayers and Tears; and for that Reason, I should think you’d better let him come down. Well, said I, I will write him a Letter, because he expects an Answer, or may-be he will make that a Pretence to come down. You’ll send it for me. How can it go?</p>
				<p>I’ll take care of that, said she; it is in my Instructions―Ay, thought I, so I doubt, by the Hint Mr. <strong>Williams</strong> gave me, about the Post-house.</p>
				<br class="small-break" />
				<p>The Gardener coming by, I said, Mr. <strong>Jacob</strong> I have planted a few Beans, and I call it my Garden. It is just by the Door out-yonder, I’ll shew it you; pray don’t dig them up. So I went on with him; and when we had turn’d the Alley out of her Sight, and were near the Place, said I, Pray step to Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, and ask her if she has any more Beans for me to plant? He smil’d, I suppose at my Foolishness, and I popt the Letter under the Mould, and stept back, as if waiting for his Return; which being near, was immediate, and she follow’d him. What should I do with Beans? said she—and sadly scar’d me; for she whisper’d me, I am afraid of some Fetch! you don’t use to send of such simple Errands—What Fetch? said I; it is hard I can neither stir, nor speak, but I must be suspected—Why, said she, my Master writes me, that I must have all my Eyes about me; for, tho’ you are as innocent as a Dove, yet you’re as cunning as a Serpent<mark id="ref12" class="reference"><a href="#note12">12</a></mark>. But I’ll forgive you if you cheat me!</p>
				<p>Then I thought of my Money, and could have call’d her Names, had I dar’d: And I said, Pray, Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong>, now you talk of forgiving me if I cheat you; be so kind as to pay me my Money; for tho’ I have no Occasion for it, yet I know you was but in Jest, and intended to give it me again. You shall have it in a proper time, said she; but, indeed, I was in earnest to get it out of your Hands, for fear you should make an ill Use of it. And so we cavilled upon this Subject as we walk’d in, and I went up to write my Letter to my Master; and, as I intended to shew it her, I resolved to write accordingly as to her Part of it; for I made little Account of the Offer of Mrs. <strong>Jervis</strong> to me, instead of this wicked Woman, (tho’ the most agreeable thing that could have befallen me, except my Escape from hence) nor indeed of any thing he said: For to be honourable, in the just Sense of the Word, he need not have caus’d me to be run away with, and confin’d as I am. I wrote as follows:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<div class="letter">
						<p>Honoured Sir,</p>
						<p class="first"><span class="first-word">When</span> I consider how easy it is for you to make me happy, since all I desire is to be permitted to go to my poor Father and Mother: When I reflect upon your former Proposal to me, in relation to a certain Person, not one Word of which is now mentioned; and upon my being in that strange manner run away with, and still kept here a miserable Prisoner; do you think, Sir, (pardon your poor Servant’s Freedom; my Fears make me bold; do you think, I say) that your general Assurances of Honour to me, can have the Effect upon me, that, were it not for these Things, all your Words ought to have?—O good Sir! I too much apprehend, that <strong>your</strong> Notions of Honour and <strong>mine</strong> are very different from one another: And I have no other Hope but in your continued Absence. If you have any Proposals to make me, that are consistent with your honourable Professions, in my humble Sense of the Word, a few Lines will communicate them to me, and I will return such an Answer as befits me. But, Oh! what Proposals can one in your high Station have to make to one in my low one! I know what belongs to your Degree too well, to imagine, that any thing can be expected but sad Temptations, and utter Distress, if you come down; and you know not, Sir, when I am made desperate, what the wretched <strong>Pamela dares to do!</strong></p>
						<p>‘Whatever Rashness you may impute to me, I cannot help it, but I wish I may not be forced upon any, that otherwise would never enter into my Thoughts. Forgive me, Sir, my Plainness; I should be loth to behave to my Master unbecomingly; but I must needs say, Sir, my Innocence is so dear to me, that all other Considerations are, and, I hope, shall ever be, treated by me as Niceties, that ought, for that, to be dispensed with. If you mean honourably, why, Sir, should you not let me know it plainly? Why is it necessary to imprison me, to convince me of it? And why must I be close watch’d and attended, hinder’d from stirring out, from speaking to any body, from going so much as to Church to pray for you, who have been till of late so generous a Benefactor to me? Why, Sir, I humbly ask, why all this, if you mean honourably?—It is not for me to expostulate so freely, but in a Case so near to me, with you, Sir, so infinitely my Superior. Pardon me, I hope you will; but as to any the least Desire of seeing you, I cannot so much as bear the dreadful Apprehension. Whatever you have to propose, whatever you intend by me, let my Assent be that of a free Person, mean as I am, and not of a sordid Slave, who is to be threatened and frightened into a Compliance, that your Conduct to her seems to imply would be otherwise abhorr’d by her.—My Restraint is indeed hard upon me. I am very uneasy under it. Shorten it, I beseech you, or—But I will not dare to say more, than that I am</p>
						<p class="signature">Your greatly oppressed unhappy Servant.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>After I had taken a Copy of this, I folded it up, and Mrs. <strong>Jewkes</strong> coming up, just as I had done, sat down by me, and said, when she saw me direct it, I wish you would tell me if you have taken my Advice, and consented to my Master’s coming down. If it will oblige <a id="page_140"></a>you, said I, I will read it to you. That’s good, said she, then I’ll love you dearly.—Says I, then you must not offer to alter one Word. I won’t, said she; so I read it to her, and she prais’d me much for my Wording it; but said, she thought I push’d the Matter very close; and it would better bear talking of, than writing about. She wanted an Explanation or two, as about the Proposal to a <strong>certain Person</strong>; but I said she must take it as she heard it. Well, well, said she, I make no doubt you understand one another, and will do so more and more. I seal’d up the Letter, and she undertook to convey it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
			<p class="note" id="note10"><a href="#ref10">10.)</a> In ancient Greek myth, Argus Panoptes is an all-seeing giant. The monster is tasked with guarding Io, a mortal woman raped by Zeus. In some myths, the monster guards Io from Zeus at the request of Zeus' jealous wife Hera; in others, Argus guards Io from escaping at Zeus' request.</p>
        <p class="note" id="note11"><a href="#ref11">11.)</a> Compare to biblical Jezebel (see also <a href="008-vol-1-letters-30-32.xhtml#note9">note 9</a>).</p>
				<p class="note" id="note12"><a href="#ref12">12.)</a> Likely a reference to Matthew 10:16-17:</p>
				<div class="blockquote">
					<p><mark>16</mark>Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. <mark>17</mark>But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; <mark>18</mark>And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for the testimony against them and the Gentiles. <mark>19</mark>But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. <mark>20</mark>For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. (<strong>KJV</strong>)</p>
				</div>
				</div>
</body>
</html>