<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head>
  <title>Pamela, Or Virtue Rewarded (A CUNY Student Edition)</title>
  <link href="styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>

<body>
    <div class="section" id="toc_1">
		<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Sunday</em> Morning.</h2>
		<p class="first">I Remember what he said, of not being obliged to ask again for my Papers; and what I was forced to do, and could not help it, I thought I might as well do, in such a manner as might shew I would not disoblige on purpose. Tho’ I stomach’d this matter very heavily too. I had therefore got in Readiness my two Parcels; and he not going to Church in the Morning, bid Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> tell me, he was gone into the Garden.</p>
		<p>I knew that was for me to go to him; and so I went. For how can I help being at his Beck? which grieves me not a little, tho’ he is my Master, as I may say; for I am so wholly in his Power, that it would do me no good to incense him; and if I refused to obey him in little Matters, my Refusal in greater would have the less Weight. So I went down to the Garden; but as he walked in one Walk, I took another; that I might not seem too forward neither.</p>
		<p>He soon ’spy’d me, and said, Do you expect to be courted to come to me? Sir, said I, and cross’d the Walk to attend him, I did not know but I should interrupt you in your Meditations this good Day.</p>
		<p>Was that the Case, said he, truly, and from your Heart? Why, Sir, said I, I don’t doubt but you have very good Thoughts sometimes: Tho’ not towards me!—I wish, said he, I could avoid thinking so well of you, as I do. But where are the Papers?—I dare say, you had them about you yesterday; for you say in those I have, that you will bury your Writings in the Garden, for fear you should be <em>search’d</em>, if you did not escape. This, added he, gave me a glorious Pretence to search you; and I have been vexing myself all Night, that I did not strip you, Garment by Garment, till I had found them. O fie, Sir, said I; let me not be scar’d, with hearing that you had such a Thought in earnest.</p>
		<p>Well, said he, I hope you have not now the Papers to give me; for I had rather find them myself, I’ll assure you.</p>
		<p>I did not like this way of Talk at all; and, thinking it best, not to dwell upon it, I said, Well, but, Sir, you will excuse me, I hope, giving up my Papers.</p>
		<p>Don’t trifle with me, said he; Where are they?—I think I was very good to you last Night, to humour you as I did. If you have either added or diminish’d, and have not strictly kept your Promise, woe be to you! Indeed, Sir, said I, I have neither added nor diminish’d. But here is the Parcel, that goes on with my sad Attempt to escape, and the terrible Consequences it had like to have been follow’d with. And it goes down to the naughty Articles you sent me. And, as you know all that has happen’d since, I hope these will satisfy you.</p>
		<p>He was going to speak; but I said, to drive him from thinking of any more; And I must beg you, Sir, to read the Matter favourably, if I have exceeded in any Liberties of my Pen.</p>
		<p>I think, said he, half-smiling, you may wonder at my Patience, that I can be so easy to read myself abus’d as I am by such a saucy Slut.—Sir, said I, I have wonder’d you should be so desirous to see my bold Stuff; and for that very Reason, I have thought it a very <em>good</em> or a very bad <em>Sign</em>. What, said he, is your <em>good</em> Sign?—That it may not have an unkind Effect upon your Temper, at last, in my Favour, when you see me so sincere. Your <em>bad</em> Sign? Why, that if you can read my Reflections and Observations upon your Treatment of me, with Tranquillity, and not be mov’d, it is a Sign of a very cruel and determin’d Heart. Now, pray Sir, don’t be angry at my Boldness, in telling you so freely my Thoughts. You may, perhaps, said he, be least mistaken when you think of your bad Sign: God forbid! said I.</p>
		<p>So I took out my Papers; and said, Here, Sir, they are. But, if you please to return them, without breaking the Seal, it will be very generous: And I will take it for a great Favour, and a good Omen.</p>
		<p>He broke the Seal instantly, and open’d them. So much for your Omen, said he. I am sorry for it, said I; and was walking away. Whither now, said he? Sir, I was going in, that you might have Time to read them, if you thought fit. He put them into his Pocket, and said, You have more than these. Yes, Sir; but all that they contain you know, as well as I.—But I don’t know, said he, the Light you put Things in; and so give them me, if you have not a Mind to be search’d.</p>
		<p>Sir, said I, I can’t stay, if you won’t forbear that ugly Word.—Give me then no Reason for it. Where are the other Papers? Why then, unkind Sir, if it must be so, here they are. And so I gave him out of my Pocket the second Parcel, seal’d up, as the former, with this Superscription; <em>From the naughty Articles, down, thro’ sad Attempts, to</em> Thursday <em>the 42d Day of my Imprisonment</em>. This is last <em>Thursday</em>, is it?—Yes, Sir; but now you <em>will</em> see what I write, I will find some other way to employ my Time: For I can neither write so free, nor with any Face, what must be for your Perusal, and not for those I intended to divert with my melancholy Stories.</p>
		<p>Yes, said he, I would have you continue your Penmanship by all means; and I assure you, in the Mind I am in, I will not ask you for any after these; except any thing very extraordinary occurs. And I have, added he, another thing to tell you, That if you send for those from your Father, and let me read them, I may very probably give them all back again to you. And so I desire you will do it.</p>
		<p>This a little encourages me to continue my Scribbling; but for fear of the worst, I will, when they come to any Bulk, contrive some way to hide them, if I can, that I may protest I have them not about me, which before I could not say of a Truth; and that made him so resolutely bent to try to find them upon me; for which I might have suffer’d frightful Indecencies.</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p>He led me then to the Side of the Pond; and sitting down on the Slope, made me sit by him. Come, said he, this being the Scene of Part of your Project, and where you so artfully threw in some of your Cloaths, I will just look upon that Part of your Relation. Sir, said I, let me then walk about, at a little Distance, for I cannot bear the Thought of it. Don’t go far, said he.</p>
		<p>When he came, as I suppose, to the Place where I mention’d the Bricks falling upon me, he got up, and walk’d to the Door, and look’d upon the broken Part of the Wall; for it had not been mended; and came back, reading on to himself, towards me; and took my Hand, and put it under his Arm.</p>
		<p>Why this, said he, my Girl, is a very moving Tale. It was a very desperate Attempt, and had you got out, you might have been in great Danger; for you had a very bad and lonely Way; and I had taken such Measures, that let you have been where you would, I would have had you.</p>
		<p>You may see, Sir, said I, what I ventur’d rather than be ruin’d; and you will be so good as hence to judge of the Sincerity of my Professions, that my Honesty is dearer to me than my Life. Romantick Girl! said he, and read on.</p>
		<p>He was very serious at my Reflections, on what God enabled me to escape. And when he came to my Reasonings, about throwing myself into the Water, he said, Walk gently before; and seem’d so mov’d, that he turn’d away his Face from me; and I bless’d this good Sign, and began not so much to repent at his seeing this mournful Part of my Story.</p>
		<p>He put the Papers in his Pocket, when he had read my Reflections, and Thanks for escaping from <em>myself</em>, and he said, taking me about the Waist, O my dear Girl! you have touch’d me sensibly with your mournful Relation, and your sweet Reflections upon it. I should truly have been very miserable, had it taken Effect. I see you have been us’d too roughly; and it is a Mercy you stood Proof in that fatal Moment.</p>
		<p>Then he most kindly folded me in his Arms; Let us, say I too, my <em>Pamela</em>, walk from this accursed Piece of Water; for I shall not, with Pleasure, look upon it again, to think how near it was to have been fatal to my Fair-one. I thought, said he, of terrifying you to my Will, since I could not move you by Love; and Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> too well obey’d me, when the Terrors of your Return, after your Disappointment, were so great, that you had hardly Courage to stand them; but had like to have made so fatal a Choice, to escape the Treatment you apprehended.</p>
		<p>O Sir, said I, I have Reason, I am sure, to bless my dear Parents, and my good Lady, your Mother, for giving me something of a religious Education; for, but for that, and God’s Grace, I should more than upon one Occasion, have attempted, at least, a desperate Act: And I the less wonder how poor Creatures, who have not the Fear of God before their Eyes, and give way to Despondency, cast themselves into Perdition.</p>
		<p>Come, kiss me, said he, and tell me you forgive me for rushing you into so much Danger and Distress. If my Mind hold, and I can see those former Papers of yours, and that these in my Pocket give me no Cause to alter my Opinion, I will endeavour to defy the World, and the World’s Censures, and make my <em>Pamela</em> Amends, if it be in the Power of my whole Life, for all the Hardships I have inflicted upon her.</p>
		<p>All this look’d well; but you shall see how strangely it was all turn’d. For this Sham-marriage then came into my Mind again; and I said, Your poor Servant is far unworthy of this great Honour; for what will it be, but to create Envy to herself, and Discredit to you? Therefore, Sir, permit me to return to my poor Parents, and that is all I have to ask.</p>
		<p>He was in a fearful Passion then. And is it thus, said he, in my fond conceding Moments, that I am to be despis’d, and thus answer’d?—Precise, perverse, unseasonable <em>Pamela</em>, begone from my Sight, and know as well how to behave in a hopeful Prospect, as in a distressful State; and then, and not till then, shalt thou attract the Shadow of my Notice.</p>
		<p>I was startled, and going to speak: But he stampt with his Foot, and said, Begone, I tell you. I cannot bear this stupid romantick Folly.</p>
		<p>One Word, said I; but one Word, I beseech you, Sir.</p>
		<p>He turn’d from me in great Wrath, and took down another Alley, and so I went in with a very heavy Heart; and fear I was too unseasonable, just at a Time, when he was so condescending: But if it was a Piece of Art of his Side, as I apprehended, to introduce the Sham-wedding, (and to be sure he is very full of Stratagem and Art) I think I was not so much to blame.</p>
		<p>So I went up to my Closet; and wrote thus far, while he walk’d about till Dinner was ready; and he is now sat down to it, as I hear by Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, very sullen, thoughtful, and out of Humour; and she asks what I have done to him?—Now again, I dread to see him!—When will my Fears be over?—</p>
	</div>
	<div class="section">
		<h2 class="sub-heading">Three o’Clock.</h2>
		<p class="first"><span class="first-word">Well</span>, he continues exceeding wroth. He has order’d his travelling Chariot to be got ready, with all Speed. What is to come next, I wonder!—</p>
		<p>Sure I did not say <em>so much!</em> But see the Lordliness of a high Condition!—A poor Body must not put in a Word when they take it into their Heads to be angry! What a fine Time a Person of unequal Condition would have of it, if even they were to marry such an one!—His poor dear Mother spoil’d him at first. Nobody must speak to him or contradict him, as I have heard, when he was a Child, and so he has not been us’d to be controul’d, and cannot bear the least Thing that crosses his violent Will. This is one of the Blessings of a high Condition! Much good may do them with their Pride of Birth, and Pride of Fortune, say I!—All that it serves for, as far as I can see, is to multiply their Disquiets, and every body’s else that has to do with them.</p>
		<p>So, so! where will this end!—Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> has been with me from him, and she says, I must get me out of the House this Moment! Well, said I, but where am I to be carry’d next? Why, home, said she, to your Father and Mother. And, can it be, said I!—No, no, I doubt I shall not be so happy as that!—To be sure, some bad Design is on foot again! To be sure it is!—Sure, sure, said I, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, he has not found out some other House-keeper worse than you! She was very angry, you may well think. But I know she can’t be made worse than she is.</p>
		<p>She came up again. Are you ready? said she. Bless me, said I, you are very hasty: I have heard of this not a Quarter of an Hour ago. But I shall be soon ready; for I have but little to take with me; and no kind Friends in this House to take Leave of, to delay me. Yet, like a Fool, I can’t help crying. Pray, said I, just step down, and ask, if I may not have my Papers?</p>
		<p>So, I am quite ready now, against she comes up with an Answer; and so I will put up these few Writings in my Bosom, that I have left.</p>
		<p>I don’t know what to think—nor how to judge; but I shall ne’er believe I am with you till I am on my Knees before you, begging both your Blessings. Yet I am sorry he is so angry with me! I thought I did not say so much.</p>
		<p>There is, I see, the Chariot drawn out, the Horses to, the grim <em>Colbrand</em> going to get a Horse-back. What will be the End of all this!</p>
	</div>
	<div class="section">
		<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Monday</em>.</h2>
		<p class="first"><span class="first-word">Well</span>, where this will end I cannot say. But here I am, at a little poor Village, almost such an one as yours; I shall learn the Name of it by-and-by. And <em>Robin</em> assures me he has Orders to carry me to you, my dear Father and Mother. God send he may say Truth, and not deceive me again. But having nothing else to do, and I am sure I shall not sleep a Wink to-night, if I was to go to bed, I will write my Time away, and take up my Story where I left off, on <em>Sunday</em> Afternoon.</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, came up to me, with this Answer about my Papers. My Master says, he will not read them yet, lest he should be mov’d by any thing in them to alter his Resolution. But, if he shall think it worth while to read them, he will send them to you afterwards to your Father’s. But, said she, here are your Guineas that I borrow’d: For all is over now, I find, with you.</p>
		<p>She saw me cry; and said, Do you repent?—Of what, said I?—Nay, I can’t tell, said she; but to be sure he has had a Taste of your satirical Flings, or he would not be so angry. Oh! said she, and held up her Hand, Thou hast a Spirit!—but I hope it will now be brought down.—I hope so too, said I.—</p>
		<p>Well, added I, I am ready. She lifted up the Window, and said, I’ll call <em>Robin</em> to take your Portmanteau: Bag and Baggage, said she, I’m glad you’re going! I have no Words, said I, to throw away upon <em>you</em>, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>; but, making her a very low Curchee, I most heartily thank you for all your <em>virtuous</em> Civilities to me. And so, adieu; for I’ll have no Portmanteau, I’ll assure you, nor any thing but these few Things that I brought with me in my Handkerchief, besides what I have on. For I had all this Time worn my own bought Cloaths, tho’ my Master would have had it otherwise often; but I had put up Paper, Ink and Pens, however.</p>
		<p>So down I went, and as I went by the Parlour, she stept in, and said, Sir, you have nothing to say to the Girl before she goes? I heard him say, tho’ I did not see him, Who bid you say <em>the Girl</em>, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, in that Manner? She has offended only me!</p>
		<p>I beg your Honour’s Pardon, said the Wretch; but if I was your Honour, she should not, for all the Trouble she has cost you, go away scot-free. No more of this, as <em>I told you before</em>, said he: What! when I have such Proof, that her Virtue is all her Pride, shall I rob her of that?—No, said he, let her go, perverse and foolish as she is; but she <em>deserves</em> to go honest, and she shall go so!</p>
		<p>I was so transported with this unexpected Goodness, that I open’d the Door before I knew what I did; and I said, falling on my Knees at the Door, with my Hands folded and lifted up, O thank you, thank your Honour a Million of Times!—May God bless you for this Instance of your Goodness to me! I will pray for you as long as I live, and so shall my dear Father and Mother. And, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said I, I will pray for <em>you</em> too, poor wicked Wretch that you are!</p>
		<p>He turn’d from me, and went into his Closet, and shut the Door. He need not have done so; for I would not have gone nearer to him!</p>
		<p>Surely I did not say so much to incur all this Displeasure!</p>
		<p>I think I was loth to leave the House. Can you believe it?—What could be the Matter with me, I wonder!—I felt something so strange, and my Heart was so lumpish!—I wonder what ail’d me!—But this was so <em>unexpected!</em>—I believe that was all!—Yet I am very strange still. Surely, surely, I cannot be like the old murmuring <em>Israelites</em>, to long after the Onions and Garlick of <em>Egypt</em>, when they had suffer’d there such heavy Bondage?—I’ll take thee, O lumpish, contradictory, ungovernable Heart, to severe Task for this thy strange Impulse, when I get to my dear Father’s and Mother’s; and if I find any thing in thee that should not be, depend upon it, thou shalt be humbled, if strict Abstinence, Prayer and Mortification will do it!</p>
		<p>But yet, after all, this last Goodness of his has touched me too sensibly. I wish I had not heard it, almost; and yet methinks I am glad I did; for I should rejoice to think the best of him, for his own sake.</p>
		<p>Well, and so I went to the Chariot, the same that brought me down. So, Mr. <em>Robert</em>, said I, here I am again! a pure Sporting-piece for the Great! a mere Tennis-ball of Fortune! You have your Orders, I hope! Yes, Madam, said he. Pray now, said I, don’t Madam me, nor stand with your Hat off to such a one as I. Had not my Master, said he, order’d me not to be wanting in Respects to you, I would have shewn you all I could. Well, said I, with my Heart full, That’s very kind, Mr. <em>Robert</em>.</p>
		<p>Mr. <em>Colbrand</em>, mounted on Horseback, with Pistols before him, came up to me, as soon as I got in, with his Hat off too. What, Monsieur, said I, are <em>you</em> to go with me?—Part of the Way, he said, to see you safe! I <em>hope</em> that’s kind too in you, Mr. <em>Colbrand</em>, said I.</p>
		<p>I had nobody to wave my Handkerchief to now, nor to take Leave of; and so I resign’d myself to my Contemplations, with this strange wayward Heart of mine, that I never found so ungovernable and awkward before.</p>
		<p>So away drove the Chariot! And when I had got out of the Elmwalk, and into the great Road, I could hardly think but I was in a Dream all the Time. A few Hours before in my Master’s Arms almost, with twenty kind Things said to me, and a generous Concern for the Misfortunes he had brought upon me; and only by one rash half Word exasperated against me, and turn’d out of Doors, at an Hour’s Warning; and all his Kindness changed to Hate! And I now, from Three o’Clock to Five, several Miles off.—But if I am going to you, all will be well again, I hope!</p>
		<p>Lack-a-day, what strange Creatures are Men! Gentlemen, I should say rather! For, my dear deserving good Mother, tho’ Poverty be both your Lots, has had a better Hap; and you are, and have always been, blest in one another!—Yet this pleases me too, he was so good, he would not let Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> speak ill of me; and scorn’d to take her odious unwomanly Advice. O what a black Heart has this poor Wretch! So I need not rail against Men so much; for my Master, bad as I have thought him, is not half so bad as this Woman!—To be sure she must be an Atheist!---- Do you think she is not?---</p>
		<p>We could not reach further than this little poor Place, and sad Ale-house, rather than Inn; for it began to be dark, and <em>Robin</em> did not make so much Haste as he might have done: And he was forc’d to make hard Shift for his Horses. Mr. <em>Colbrand</em> and <em>Robert</em> too are very civil. I see he has got my Portmanteau lash’d behind the Coach. I did not desire it; but I shall not come quite empty. A thorough Riddance of me, I see!—Bag and Baggage! as Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> says. Well, my Story surely would furnish out a surprizing kind of Novel, if it was to be well told.</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p>Mr. <em>Robert</em> came up to me, just now, and begg’d me to eat something. I thank’d him; but said I could not eat. I bid him ask Mr. <em>Colbrand</em> to walk up; and he came; but neither of them would sit, nor put their Hats on. What Mockado is this to such a poor Soul as I! I ask’d them, if they were at Liberty to tell me the Truth of what they were to do with me? if not, I would not desire it.—They both said, <em>Robin</em> was order’d to carry me to my Father’s. And Mr. <em>Colbrand</em> was to leave me within ten Miles, and then strike off for the other House, and wait till my Master arriv’d there. They both spoke so solemnly, that I cannot but believe them.</p>
		<p>But when <em>Robin</em> went down, the other said, he had a Letter to give me next Day, at Noon, when we baited, as we were to do, at Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>’s Relations.—May I not, said I, beg the Favour to see it to-night? He seem’d so loth to deny me; that I have Hopes, I shall prevail on him by-and-by.</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p>Well, my dear Father and Mother, I have, on great Promises of Secrecy, and making no Use of it, got the Letter. I will try if I can open it, without breaking the Seal, and will take a Copy of it, by-and-by: For <em>Robin</em> is in and out; there being hardly any Room in this little House for one to be long alone. Well, this is the Letter.</p>
		<div class="blockquote letter">
			<p class="first"><span class="first-word">When</span> these Lines are deliver’d to you, you will be far on your Way to your Father and Mother, where you have so long desired to be. And, I hope, I shall forbear thinking of you with the least Shadow of that Fondness my foolish Heart had entertain’d for you. I bear you, however, no Ill-will; but the End of my detaining you being over, I would not that you should tarry with me an Hour more than needed, after the ungenerous Preference you gave against me, at a Time that I was inclined to pass over all other Considerations, for an honourable Address to you; for well I found the Tables intirely turn’d upon me, and that I was in far more Danger from <em>you</em> than you was from <em>me</em>; for I was just upon resolving to defy all the Censures of the World, and to make you my Wife.</p>
			<p>I will acknowledge another Truth; That had I not parted with you as I did, but permitted you to stay till I had read your Journal, reflecting, as I doubt not I shall find it, and till I had heard your bewitching Pleas in your Behalf, I fear’d I could not trust myself with my own Resolution. And this is the Reason, I frankly own, that I have determin’d not to see you, nor hear you speak; for, well I know my Weakness in your Favour.</p>
			<p>But I will get the better of this fond Folly. Nay, I hope I have already done it, since it was likely to cost me so dear. And I write this to tell you, that I wish you well with all my Heart, tho’ you have spread such Mischiefs thro’ my Family.—And yet, I cannot but say, that I could wish you would not think of marrying in haste; and particularly that you would not have this cursed <em>Williams</em>.—But what is all this to me now?—Only, my Weakness makes me say, That as I had already look’d upon you as mine; and you have so soon got rid of your first Husband, so you will not refuse, to my Memory, the Decency that every common Person observes, to pay a Twelve-month’s Compliment, tho’ but a mere Compliment, to my Ashes.</p>
			<p>Your Papers shall be faithfully return’d you, and I have paid so dear for my Curiosity in the Affection they have rivetted upon me for you, that you would look upon yourself amply reveng’d, if you knew what they have cost me.</p>
			<p>I thought of writing but a few Lines; but I have run into Length. I will now try to recollect my scatter’d Thoughts, and resume my Reason, and shall find Trouble enough to replace my Affairs, and my own Family; and to supply the Chasms you have made in it: For, let me tell you, tho’ I can forgive you, I never can my Sister, nor my Domestics; for my Vengeance must be wreak’d somewhere.</p>
			<p>I doubt not your Prudence in forbearing to expose me any more than is necessary for your own Justification; and for <em>that</em>, I will suffer myself to be accused by you, and will also accuse myself, if it be needful. For I am, and will ever be,</p>
			<p class="salutation">Your affectionate Well-wisher.</p>
		</div>
		<p>This Letter, when I expected some new Plot, has affected me more than any thing of that Sort could have done. For here is plainly his great Value for me confess’d, and his rigorous Behaviour accounted for in such a Manner, as tortures me much. And all this wicked Gypsey Story is, as it seems, a Forgery upon us both, and has quite ruin’d me! For, Oh! my dear Parents, forgive me! but I found to my Grief before, that my Heart was too partial in his Favour; but <em>now</em>, with so much Openness, so much Affection, nay, so much <em>Honour</em> too, (which was all I had before doubted, and kept me on the Reserve) I am quite overcome. This was a Happiness, however, I had no Reason to expect. But to be sure, I must own to you, that I shall never be able to think of any body in the World but him!—Presumption, you will say; and so it is: But Love is not a voluntier Thing:—<em>Love</em>, did I say!—But, come, I hope not!—At least it is not, I hope, gone so far, as to make me <em>very</em> uneasy; for I know not <em>how</em> it came, nor when it begun; but creep, creep it has, like a Thief upon me; and before I knew what was the Matter, it look’d like Love.</p>
		<p>I wish, since it is too late, and my Lot determin’d, that I had not had this Letter; nor heard him take my Part to that vile Woman; for then I should have bless’d myself, in having escap’d so happily his designing Arts upon my Virtue; but <em>now</em>, my poor Mind is all topsy-turvy’d, and I have made an Escape, to be more a Prisoner!</p>
		<p>But, I hope, since thus it is, that all will be for the best; and I shall, with your prudent Advice, and pious Prayers, be able to overcome this Weakness.—But, to be sure, my dear Sir, I will keep a longer Time than a Twelve-month, as a true Widow, for a Compliment, and <em>more</em> than a Compliment, to your Ashes!—O the dear Word!—How kind, how moving, how affectionate is that Word! O why was I not a Duchess, to shew my Gratitude for it? but must labour under the Weight of an Obligation, even had this Happiness befallen me, that would have press’d me to Death, and which I never could return by a whole Life of faithful Love, and chearful Obedience.</p>
		<p>O forgive your poor Daughter!—I am sorry to find this Trial so sore upon me; and that all the Weakness of my weak Sex, and tender Years, who never before knew what it was to be so touch’d, is rais’d against me, and too mighty to be withstood by me.—But Time, Prayer, and Resignation to God’s Will, and the Benefits of your good Lessons and Examples, I hope, will enable me to get over this so heavy a Trial.—O my treacherous, treacherous Heart! to serve me thus! And give no Notice to me of the Mischiefs thou wast about to bring upon me! But thus foolishly to give thyself up to the proud Invader, without ever consulting thy poor Mistress in the least! But thy Punishment will be the <em>first</em> and the <em>greatest</em>; and well deservest thou to smart, O perfidious Traitor, for giving up so weakly, thy <em>whole Self</em>, before a Summons came, and to one too, who had us’d me so hardly! And when, likewise, thou hadst so well maintain’d thy Post against the most violent and avowed, and therefore, as I thought, more dangerous Attacks.</p>
		<p>After all, I must either not shew you this my Weakness, or tear it out of my Writing.—<em>Memorandum</em>, to consider of this, when I get home.</p>
	</div>
	<div class="section">
		<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Monday</em> Morning Eleven o’Clock.</h2>
		<p class="first"><span class="first-word">We</span> are just come in here, to the Relations of Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>. The first Compliment I had, was, in a very impudent manner, How I liked the ’Squire?—I could not help saying, Bold, forward Woman! Is it for you, who keep an Inn, to treat Passengers at this Rate? She was but in jest, she said, and begg’d Pardon: And she came, and begg’d Excuse again, very submissively, after <em>Robin</em> and Mr. <em>Colbrand</em> had talk’d to her a little.</p>
		<p>The latter here, in great Form, gave me, before <em>Robin</em>, the Letter, which I had given him back for that purpose. And I retir’d, as if to read it; and so I did; for I think I can’t read it too often; tho’, for my Peace of Mind sake, I might better try to forget it. I am sorry, methinks, I cannot bring you back a sound Heart; but indeed it is an honest one, as to any body but me; for it has deceived nobody else: Wicked thing as it is!</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p>More and more surprizing Things still!—</p>
		<p>Just as I had sat down, to try to eat a bit of Victuals, to get ready to pursue my Journey, came in Mr. <em>Colbrand</em>, in a mighty Hurry. O Madam! Madam! said he, Here be de Groom from de ’Squire <em>B</em>. all over in a Lather, Man and Horse! O how my Heart went pit-a-pat!—What now, thought I, is to come next! He went out, and presently return’d with a Letter for me, and another, inclosed, for Mr. <em>Colbrand</em>. This seem’d odd, and put me all in a Trembling. So I shut the Door; and, never, sure, was the like known! found the following agreeable Contents.</p>
		<div class="blockquote letter">
			<p class="first"><span class="first-word">In</span> vain, my <em>Pamela</em>, do I find it to struggle against my Affection for you. I must needs, after you were gone, venture to entertain myself with your Journal. When I found Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>’s bad Usage of you, after your dreadful Temptations and Hurts; and particularly your generous Concern for me, on hearing how narrowly I escaped drowning (tho’ my Death would have been your Freedom, and I had made it your Interest to wish it); and your most agreeable Confession in another Place, that notwithstanding all my hard Usage of you, you could not <em>hate</em> me; and that expressed in so sweet, so soft, and so innocent a manner, that I flatter myself you may be brought to <em>love</em> me, (together with the other Parts of your admirable Journal) I began to repent my parting with you. But, God is my Witness, for no unlawful End, as you would call it; but the very contrary. And the rather, as all this was improv’d in your Favour, by your Behaviour at leaving my House: For, Oh! that melodious Voice praying for me at your Departure, and thanking me for my Rebuke to Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, still hangs upon my Ears, and quavers upon my Memory. And tho’ I went to-bed, I could not rest; but about Two got up, and made <em>Thomas</em> get one of the best Horses ready, in order to set out to overtake you, while I sat down to write this to you.</p>
			<p>Now, my dear <em>Pamela</em>, let me beg of you, on the Receipt of this, to order <em>Robin</em> to drive you back again to my House. I would have set out myself, for the Pleasure of bearing you Company back in the Chariot; but am really indisposed: I believe, with Vexation that I should part thus with my Soul’s Delight, as I now find you are, and must be, in spight of the Pride of my own Heart.</p>
			<p>You cannot imagine the Obligation your Return will lay me under to your Goodness; and yet, if you will not so far favour me, you shall be under no Restraint, as you will see by my Letter inclosed to <em>Colbrand</em>; which I have not sealed, that you may read it. But spare me, my dearest Girl, the Confusion of following you to your Father’s; which I must do, if you persist to go on; for I find I cannot live a Day without you.</p>
			<p>If you are the generous <em>Pamela</em> I imagine you to be, (for hitherto you have been all Goodness, where it has not been merited) let me see, by this new Instance, the further Excellency of your Disposition; let me see you can forgive the Man who loves you more than himself; let me see by it, that you are not prepossess’d in any other Person’s Favour: And one Instance more I would beg, and then I am all Gratitude; and that is, That you would dispatch Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em> with a Letter to your Father, assuring him, that all will end happily; and that he will send to you, at my House, the Letters you found means, by <em>Williams</em>’s Conveyance, to send him: And when I have all my proud, and, perhaps, punctilious Doubts answer’d, I shall have nothing to do, but to make you happy, and be so my self. For I must be</p>
			<div class="row">
				<div class="col-left postscript">
					<p><em>Monday</em> Morn. near Three o’Clock.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="col-right signature">
					<p>Yours, and only yours.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
		<p>O my exulting Heart! how it throbs in my Bosom, as if it would reproach me for so lately upbraiding it for giving way to the Love of so dear a Gentleman!—But, take care thou art not too credulous neither, O fond Believer! Things that we wish, are apt to gain a too ready Credence with us. This sham Marriage is not yet clear’d up; Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, the vile Mrs. <em>Jewkes!</em> may yet instigate the Mind of this Master: His Pride of Heart, and Pride of Condition, may again take place; and a Man that could, in so little a Space, first love me, then hate me, then banish me his House, and send me away disgracefully; and now send for me again, in such affectionate Terms; may still waver, may still deceive thee. Therefore will I not acquit thee yet, O credulous, fluttering, throbbing Mischief! that art so ready to believe what thou wishest: And I charge thee to keep better Guard than thou hast lately done, and lead me not to follow too implicitly thy flattering and desirable Impulses. Thus foolishly dialogu’d I with my Heart; and yet all the time this Heart is <em>Pamela</em>.</p>
		<p>I open’d the Letter to Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em>; which was in these Words:</p>
		<div class="blockquote letter">
			<p class="salutation">Monsieur,</p>
			<p class="first">I Am sure you’ll excuse the Trouble I give you. I have, for good Reasons, changed my Mind; and I have besought it as a Favour, that Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> will return to me the Moment <em>Tom</em> reaches you. I hope, for the Reasons I have given her, she will have the Goodness to oblige me. But if not, you are to order <em>Robin</em> to pursue his Directions, and set her down at her Father’s Door. If she <em>will</em> oblige me in her Return, perhaps she’ll give you a Letter to her Father, for some Papers to be deliver’d to you for her. Which you’ll be so good, in that Case, to bring to her <em>here</em>. But if she will <em>not</em> give you such a Letter, you’ll return with her to me, if she pleases to favour me so far; and that with all Expedition, that her Health and Safety will permit; for I am pretty much indisposed; but hope it will be but slight, and soon go off. I am</p>
			<p class="signature">Yours, &amp;c.</p>
			<div class="postscript">
				<p>On second Thoughts, let <em>Tom</em> go forward with Mrs. <em>Andrews</em>’s Letter, if she pleases to give one, and you return with her, for her Safety.</p>
			</div>
		</div>
		<p>Now this is a dear generous Manner of treating me. O how I love to be generously used!—Now, my dear Parents, I wish I could consult you for your Opinions, how I should act. Should I go back, or should I not?—I doubt he has got too great Hold in my Heart, for me to be easy presently, if I should refuse: And yet this Gypsey Information makes me fearful.</p>
		<p>Well, I will, I think, trust in his Generosity! Yet is it not too great a Trust?—especially considering how I have been used!—But then that was while he vow’d his bad Designs; and now he gives great Hope of his good ones. And I <em>may</em> be the means of making many happy, as well as myself, by placing a generous Confidence in him.</p>
		<p>And then, I think, he might have sent to <em>Colbrand</em>, and to <em>Robin</em>, to carry me back, whether I would or not. And how different is his Behaviour to that? And would it not look as if I am <em>prepossess’d</em>, as he calls it, if I don’t oblige him; and as if it was a silly female Piece of Pride to make him follow me to my Father’s; and as if I would use him hardly in <em>my</em> Turn, for his having used me ill in <em>his?</em> Upon the whole, I resolved to obey him; and if he uses me ill afterwards, double will be his ungenerous Guilt!—Tho’ hard will be my Lot, to have my Credulity so justly blameable as it will then seem. For, to be sure, the World, the wise World, that never is wrong itself, judges always by Events. And if he should use me ill, then I shall be blamed for trusting him: If well, O then I did right, to be sure!—But how would my Censurers act in my Case, before the Event justifies or condemns the Action, is the Question?</p>
		<p>Then I have no Notion of obliging by Halves; but of doing things with a Grace, as one may say, where they <em>are</em> to be done; and so I wrote the desir’d Letter to you, assuring you, that I had before me happier Prospects than ever I yet had; and hoped all would end well. And that I begg’d you would send me, by Mr. <em>Thomas</em>, my Master’s Groom, the Bearer of it, those Papers, which I had sent you by Mr. <em>Williams</em>’s Conveyance: For that they imported me much, for clearing up a Point in my Conduct, that my Master was desirous to know, before he resolved to favour me, as he had intended.—But you will have that Letter, before you can have this; for I would not send you this without the preceding; which now is in my Master’s Hands.</p>
		<p>And so, having given the Letter to Mr. <em>Thomas</em>, for him to carry to you, when he had baited and rested, after his great Fatigue, I sent for Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em> and <em>Robin</em>; and gave to the former his Letter; and when he had read it, I said, You see how things stand. I am resolved to return to our Master; and as he is not so well as were to be wished, the more Haste you make, the better: And don’t mind my Fatigue; but consider only yourselves, and the Horses. <em>Robin</em>, who guess’d the matter, by his Conversation with <em>Thomas</em>, (as I suppose) said, God bless you, Madam, and reward you, as your Obligingness to my good Master deserves; and may we all live to see you triumph over Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>.</p>
		<p>I wonder’d to hear him say so; for I was always careful of exposing my Master, or even that naughty Woman, before the common Servants. But yet I question whether <em>Robin</em> would have said this, if he had not guessed, by <em>Thomas</em>’s Message, and my resolving to return, that I might stand well with his Master. So selfish are the Hearts of poor Mortals, that they are ready to change as Favour goes!</p>
		<p>So they were not long getting ready; and I am just setting out, back again; and I hope in God, shall have no Reason to repent it.</p>
		<br class="small-break"/>
		<p><em>Robin</em> put on very vehemently; and when we came to the little Town, where we lay on <em>Sunday</em> Night, he gave his Horses a Bait; and said, he would push for his Master’s that Night, as it would be Moon-light, if I should not be too much fatigu’d; because there was no Place between that and the Town adjacent to his Master’s, fit to put up for the Night. But Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em>’s Horse beginning to give way, made a Doubt between them: Wherefore I said (hating to lie on the Road) If it could be done, I should bear it well enough, I hoped; and that Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em> might leave his Horse, when it fail’d, at some House, and come into the Chariot. This pleased them both; and about twelve Miles short, he left the Horse, and took off his Spurs and Holsters, <em>&amp;c</em>. and, with Abundance of ceremonial Excuses, came into the Chariot; and I sat the easier for it; for my Bones ached sadly with the Jolting, and so many Miles travelling in so few Hours, as I had done, from <em>Sunday</em> Night, Five o’Clock. But, for all this, it was Eleven o’Clock at Night when we came to the Village adjacent to my Master’s; and the Horses began to be very much tired, and <em>Robin</em> too; but I said, It would be pity to put up only three Miles short of the House.</p>
		<p>So about One we reach’d the Gate; but every body was a-bed. But one of the Helpers got the Keys from Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, and open’d the Gates; and the Horses could hardly crawl into the Stables. And I, when I went to get out of the Chariot, fell down, and thought I had lost the Use of my Limbs.</p>
		<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> came down, with her Cloaths huddled on, and lifted up her Hands and Eyes, at my Return. But shew’d more Care of the Horses than of me. By that time the two Maids came; and I made shift to creep in as well as I could.</p>
		<p>It seems my poor Master was very ill indeed, and had been upon the Bed most part of the Day; and <em>Abraham</em> (who succeeded <em>John</em>) sat up with him. And he was got into a fine Sleep, and heard not the Coach come in, nor the Noise we made; for his Chamber lay towards the Garden, on the other Side the House. Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> said, He had a feverish Complaint, and had been blooded; and, very prudently, order’d <em>Abraham</em>, when he awaked, not to tell him I was come, for fear of surprizing him, and augmenting his Fever; nor, indeed, to say any thing of me, till she herself broke it to him in the Morning, as she should see how he was.</p>
		<p>So I went to-bed with Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, after she had caused me to drink almost half a Pint of burnt Wine, made very rich and cordial, with Spices; which I found very refreshing, and set me into a Sleep I little hoped for.</p>
	</div>
	<div class="section">
		<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Tuesday</em> Morning.</h2>
		<p class="first">Getting up pretty early, I have written thus far, while Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> lies snoring in bed, fetching-up her last Night’s Disturbance. I long for her Rising, to know how my poor Master does. ’Tis well for her she can sleep so purely. No Love, but for herself, will ever break her Rest, I am sure. I am deadly sore all over, as if I had been soundly beaten. Yet I did not think I could have liv’d under such Fatigue.</p>
		<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, as soon as she got up, went to know how my Master did, and he had had a good Night; and having drank plentifully of Sack-whey, had sweated much; so that his Fever had abated considerably. She said to him, that he must not be surprized, and she would tell him News. He asked, What? and she said, I was come. He raised himself up in his Bed; Can it be? said he:—What, already!—She told him, I came last Night. Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em> coming to inquire of his Health, he order’d him to draw near him, and was infinitely pleased with the Account he gave him of the Journey; my Readiness to come back, and my Willingness to reach home that Night. And he said, Why, these tender Fair-ones, I think, bear Fatigue better than us Men. But she is very good, to give me such an Instance of her Readiness to oblige me. Pray, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said he, take great Care of her Health; and let her lie a-bed all Day. She told him, I had been up these two Hours. Ask her, said he, if she will be so good as to pay me a Visit; if she won’t, I’ll rise, and go to her. Indeed, Sir, said she, you must lie still; and I’ll go to her. But don’t urge her too much, said he, if she be unwilling.</p>
		<p>She came to me, and told me all the above; and I said, I would most willingly wait upon him. For indeed I longed to see him, and was much grieved he was so ill.—So I went down with her. Will she come? said he, as I enter’d the Room. Yes, Sir, said she; and she said, at the first Word, Most willingly. Sweet Excellence! said he.</p>
		<p>As soon as he saw me, he said, O my beloved <em>Pamela!</em> you have made me quite well. I’m concern’d to return my Acknowledgments to you in so unfit a Place and Manner; but will you give me your Hand? I did, and he kissed it with great Eagerness. Sir, said I, you do me too much Honour!—I am sorry you are ill.—I can’t be ill, said he, while you are with me. I am well already.</p>
		<p>Well, said he, and kissed my Hand again, you shall not repent this Goodness. My Heart is too full of it, to express myself as I ought. But I am sorry you have had such a fatiguing Time of it.—Life is no Life without you! If you had refused me, and yet I had hardly Hopes you would oblige me, I should have had a severe Fit of it, I believe; for I was taken very oddly, and knew not what to make of myself: But now I shall be well instantly. You need not, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, added he, send for the Doctor from <em>Stamford</em>, as we talked Yesterday; for this lovely Creature is my Doctor, as her Absence was my Disease.</p>
		<p>He begg’d me to sit down by his Bed-side, and asked me, If I had obliged him with sending for my former Pacquet? I said, I had, and hoped it would be brought. He said, It was doubly kind.</p>
		<p>I would not stay long, because of disturbing him. And he got up in the Afternoon, and desir’d my Company; and seem’d quite pleas’d, easy, and much better. He said, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, after this Instance of my good <em>Pamela</em>’s Obligingness in her Return, I am sure we ought to leave her intirely at her own Liberty; and pray, if she pleases to take a Turn in the Chariot, or in the Garden, or to the Town, or where-ever she will, she must be left at Liberty, and asked no Questions; and do you do all in your Power to oblige her. She said, she would, to be sure.</p>
		<p>He took my Hand, and said, One thing I will tell you, <em>Pamela</em>, because I know you will be glad to hear it, and yet not care to ask me, I have taken <em>Williams</em>’s Bond for the Money; for how the poor Man had behaved, I can’t tell; but he could get no Bail; and if I have no fresh Reason given me, perhaps I shall not exact the Payment; and he has been some time at Liberty; and now follows his School; but, methinks, I could wish you would not see him at present.</p>
		<p>Sir, said I, I will not do any thing to disoblige you wilfully; and I am glad he is at Liberty, because I was the Occasion of his Misfortunes. I durst say no more, tho’ I wanted to plead for the poor Gentleman; which, in Gratitude, I thought I ought, when I could do him Service. I said, I am sorry, Sir, Lady <em>Davers</em>, who loves you so well, should have incurr’d your Displeasure, and there should be any Variance between your Honour and her. I hope it was not on my Account. He took out of his Waistcoat Pocket, as he sat in his Gown, his Letter-case, and said, Here, <em>Pamela</em>, read that when you go up Stairs, and let me have your Thoughts upon it; and that will let you into the Affair. He said, he was very heavy of a sudden, and would lie down, and indulge for that Day; and if he was better in the Morning, would take an Airing in the Chariot. And so I took my Leave for the present, and went up to my Closet, and read the Letter he was pleased to put into my Hands; and which is as follows:</p>
		<div class="blockquote letter">
			<p class="salutation">Brother,</p>
			<p class="first">I Am very uneasy at what I hear of you; and must write, whether it please you or not, my <em>full</em> Mind. I have had some People with me, desiring me to interpose with you; and they have a greater Regard for your Honour, than, I am sorry to say it, you have yourself. Could I think that a Brother of mine would so meanly run away with my late dear Mother’s Waiting-maid, and keep her a Prisoner from all her Friends, and to the Disgrace of your own. But I thought, when you would not let the Wench come to me on my Mother’s Death, that you meant no good.—I blush for you, I’ll assure you. The Girl was an innocent, good Girl; but I suppose that’s over with her now, or soon will. What can you mean by this, let me ask you? Either you will have her for a kept Mistress, or for a Wife. If the former; there are enough to be had, without ruining a poor Wench that my Mother lov’d, and who really was a very good Girl; and of <em>this</em> you may be asham’d. As to the <em>other</em>, I dare say, you don’t think of it; but if you <em>should</em>, you would be utterly inexcusable. Consider, Brother, that ours is no up-start Family; but is as ancient as the best in the Kingdom; and, for several Hundreds of Years, it has never been known that the Heirs of it have disgraced themselves by unequal Matches: And you know you have been sought to by some of the first Families in the Nation, for your Alliance. It might be well enough, if you were descended of a Family of Yesterday, or but a Remove or two from the Dirt you seem so fond of. But, let me tell you, that I, and all mine, will renounce you for ever, if you can descend so meanly; and I shall be ashamed to be called your Sister. A handsome Gentleman as you are in your Person; so happy in the Gifts of your Mind, that every body courts your Company; and possess’d of such a noble and clear Estate; and very rich in Money besides, left you by the best of Fathers and Mothers, with such ancient Blood in your Veins, untainted! for <em>you</em> to throw away yourself thus, is intolerable; and it would be very wicked in you to ruin the Wench too. So that I beg you will restore her to her Parents, and give her 100 <em>l</em>. or so, to make her happy in some honest Fellow of her own Degree; and that will be doing something, and will also oblige and pacify</p>
			<p class="signature">Your much grieved Sister.</p>
			<div class="postscript">
				<p>If I have written too sharply, consider it is my Love to you, and the Shame you are bringing upon yourself; and I wish this may have the Effect upon you intended by your very loving Sister.</p>
			</div>
			<p>This is a sad Letter, my dear Father and Mother; and one may see how poor People are despised by the Proud and the Rich; and yet we were all on a foot originally: And many of these Gentlefolks, that brag of their ancient Blood, would be glad to have it as wholsome, and as really untainted, as ours!—Surely these proud People never think what a short Stage Life is; and that, with all their Vanity, a Time is coming, when they shall be obliged to submit to be on a Level with us; and true said the Philosopher, when he looked upon the Skull of a King, and that of a poor Man, that he saw no Difference between them. Besides, do they not know, that the richest of Princes, and the poorest of Beggars, are to have one great and tremendous Judge, at the last Day; who will not distinguish between them, according to their Qualities in Life?—But, on the contrary, may make their Condemnations the greater, as their neglected Opportunities were the greater? Poor Souls! how I pity their Pride!—O keep me, gracious God! from <em>their</em> high Condition, if my Mind shall ever be tainted with their Vice! or polluted with so cruel and inconsiderate a Contempt of the humble Estate which they behold with so much Scorn!</p>
			<p>But besides, how do these Gentry know, that supposing they could trace back their Ancestry, for one, two, three, or even five hundred Years, that then the original Stems of these poor Families, tho’ they have not kept such elaborate Records of their Good-for-nothingness, as it often proves, were not still deeper rooted?—And how can they be assured, that one hundred Years hence or two, some of those now despised upstart Families, may not revel in their Estates, while their Descendants may be reduced to the other’s Dunghils?—And, perhaps, such is the Vanity, as well as Changeableness of human Estates, in <em>their</em> Turns set up for Pride of Family, and despise the others!</p>
			<p>These Reflections occurr’d to my Thoughts, made serious by my Master’s Indisposition, and this proud Letter, of the <em>lowly</em> Lady <em>Davers</em>, against the <em>high-minded</em> Pamela. <em>Lowly</em>, I say, because she could <em>stoop</em> to such vain <em>Pride;</em> and <em>high-minded I</em>, because I hope I am too <em>proud</em> ever to do the like!—But, after all, poor Wretches that we be! we scarce know what we <em>are</em>, much less what we <em>shall be!</em>—But, once more, pray I, to be kept from the sinful Pride of a high Estate!</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>On this Occasion I recall the following Lines, which I have read; where the Poet argues in a much better manner.</p>
			<div class="blockquote poem">
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<p>————Wise Providence</p>
					<p>Does various Parts for various Minds dispense;</p>
					<p>The <strong class="clear">meanest</em> Slaves, or those who <strong class="clear">hedge</em> and <strong class="clear">ditch</em>,</p>
					<p>Are useful, by their Sweat, to feed the <strong class="clear">Rich</em>.</p>
					<p>The <strong class="clear">Rich</em>, in due Return, impart their Store;</p>
					<p>Which comfortably feeds the lab’ring <strong class="clear">Poor</em>.</p>
					<p>Nor let the <strong class="clear">Rich</em> the lowest <strong class="clear">Slave</em> disdain.</p>
					<p>He’s <strong class="clear">equally</em> a <strong class="clear">Link</em>of Nature’s Chain;</p>
					<p>Labours to the <strong class="clear">same End</em>, joins in <strong class="clear">one View</em>;</p>
					<p>And <strong class="clear">both alike</em> the <strong class="clear">Will divine</em>pursue:</p>
					<p>And, at the last, are levell’d, <strong class="clear">King</em> and <strong class="clear">Slave</em>,</p>
					<p>Without Distinction, in the silent Grave.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
		<div class="section">
			<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Wednesday</em> Morning.</h2>
			<p class="first"><span class="first-word">My</span> Master sent me a Message just now, that he was so much better, that he would take a Turn after Breakfast, in the Chariot, and would have me give him my Company! I hope I shall know how to be humble, and comport myself as I should do under all these Favours.</p>
			<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> is one of the most obliging Creatures in the World; and I have such Respects shewn me by every one, as if I was as great as Lady <em>Davers</em>.—But now, if this should all end in the Sham-marriage!—It cannot be, I hope. Yet the Pride of Greatness and Ancestry, and such-like, is so strongly set out in Lady <em>Davers</em>’s Letter, that I cannot flatter myself to be so happy as all these desirable Appearances make for me. Should I be <em>now</em> deceived, I should be worse off than ever. But I shall see what Light this new Honour will procure me!—So I’ll get ready. But I won’t, I think, change my Garb. Should I do it, it would look as if I would be nearer on a Level with him: And yet, should I not, it may be thought a Disgrace to him; but I will, I think, open the Portmanteau, and, for the first time, since I came hither, put on my best Silk Night-gown. But then that will be making myself a sort of Right to the Cloaths I had renounced; and I am not yet quite sure I shall have no other Crosses to encounter. So I will go as I am; for tho’ ordinary, I am as clean as a Penny, tho’ I say it. So I’ll e’en go as I am, except he orders otherwise. Yet Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> says, I ought to dress as fine as I can!—But I say, I think not. As my Master is up, and at Breakfast, I will venture down to ask him how he will have me be.—</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>Well, he is kinder and kinder, and, thank God, purely recover’d!—How charmingly he looks, to what he did Yesterday! Blessed be God for it!</p>
			<p>He arose and came to me, and took me by the Hand, and would set me down by him; and he said. My charming Girl seem’d going to speak. What would you say?—Sir, said I, (a little asham’d) I think it is too great an Honour to go into the Chariot with you! No, my dear <em>Pamela</em>, said he; the <em>Pleasure</em> of your Company will be greater than the <em>Honour</em> of mine; and so say no more on that Head.</p>
			<p>But, Sir, said I, I shall disgrace you to go thus. You will grace a Prince, my Fair-one, said the good kind, kind Gentleman! in that Dress, or any you shall chuse. And you look so pretty, that if you shall not catch Cold, in that round-ear’d Cap, you shall go just as you are. But, Sir, said I, then you’ll be pleased to go a By-way, that it mayn’t be seen you do so much Honour to your Servant. O my good Girl, said he, I doubt you are afraid of yourself being talk’d of, more than me. For I hope, by degrees, to take off the World’s Wonder, and teach them to expect what is to follow, as a Due to my <em>Pamela</em>.</p>
			<p>O the dear good Man! There’s for you, my dear Father and Mother!—Did I not do well now to come back!—O could I get rid of my Fears of this Sham-marriage, (for all this is not yet inconsistent with that frightful Scheme) I should be too happy!</p>
			<p>So I came up, with great Pleasure, for my Gloves; and now wait his kind Commands. Dear, dear Sir! said I to myself, as if I was speaking to him, for <em>God</em>’s sake let me have no more Trials and Reverses; for I could not bear it now, I verily think!</p>
			<p>At last the welcome Message came, that my Master was ready; and so I went down as fast as I could; and he, before all the Servants, handed me in, as if I was a Lady; and then came in himself. Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> begg’d he would take care he did not catch Cold, as he had been ill. And I had the Pride to hear his new Coachman say, to one of his Fellow-servants, They are a charming Pair, I am sure! ’tis pity they should be parted!—O my dear Father and Mother! I fear your Girl will grow as proud as any thing! And especially you will think I have Reason to guard against it, when you read the kind Particulars I am going to relate.</p>
			<p>He order’d Dinner to be ready by Two; and <em>Abraham</em>, who succeeds <em>John</em>, went behind the Coach. He bid <em>Robin</em> drive gently, and told me, he wanted to talk to me about his Sister <em>Davers</em>, and other Matters. Indeed, at first setting out, he kissed me a little too often, that he did; and I was afraid of <em>Robin</em>’s looking back, thro’ the Fore-glass, and People seeing us as they passed; but he was exceedingly kind to me, in his Words, as well. At last, he said,</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>You have, I doubt not, read, over and over, my Sister’s sawcy Letter; and find, as I told you, that you are no more obliged to her than I am. You see she intimates that some People had been with her; and who should they be but the officious Mrs. <em>Jervis</em>, and Mr. <em>Longman</em>, and <em>Jonathan!</em> And so that has made me take the Measures I did in dismissing them my Service.—I see, said he, you are going to speak on their Behalfs; but your Time is not come to do that, if ever I shall permit it.</p>
			<p>My Sister, says he, I have been beforehand with; for I have renounced her. I am sure I have been a kind Brother to her; and gave her to the Value of 3000 <em>l</em>. more than her Share came to by my Father’s Will, when I enter’d upon my Estate. And the Woman, surely, was beside herself with Passion and Insolence, when she wrote me such a Letter; for well she knew I would not bear it. But you must know, <em>Pamela</em>, that she is much incensed, that I will give no Ear to a Proposal of hers, of a Daughter of my Lord——who, said he, neither in Person or Mind, or Acquirements, even with all her Opportunities, is to be named in a Day with my <em>Pamela</em>. But yet you see the Plea, my Girl, which I made to you before, of this Pride of Condition, and the World’s Censure, which, I own, sticks a little too close with me still. For a Woman shines not forth to the Publick as a Man; and the World sees not your Excellencies and Perfections: If it did, I should intirely stand acquitted by the severest Censurers. But it will be taken in the Lump; that here is Mr. <em>B</em>——, with such and such an Estate, has married his Mother’s Waiting-maid; not considering there is not a Lady in the Kingdom that can outdo her, or better support the Condition to which she will be raised, if I should marry her. And, said he, putting his Arm round me, and again kissing me, I pity my dear Girl too, for <em>her</em> Part in this Censure; for, here will she have to combat the Pride and Slights of the neighbouring Gentry all around us. Sister <em>Davers</em>, you see, will never be reconciled to you. The other Ladies will not visit you; and you will, with a Merit transcending them all, be treated as if unworthy their Notice. Should I now marry my <em>Pamela</em>, how will my Girl relish all this? Won’t these be cutting things to my Fair-one? For, as to me, I shall have nothing to do, but, with a good Estate in Possession, to brazen out the Matter, of my former Jokes on this Subject, with my Companions of the Chace, the Green, and the Assemblée; stand their rude Jests for once or twice, and my Fortune will create me always Respect enough, I warrant you. But, I say, what will my poor Girl do, as to her Part, with her own Sex? For some Company you must keep. My Station will not admit it to be with my common Servants; and the Ladies will fly your Acquaintance; and still, tho’ my Wife, will treat you as my Mother’s Waiting-maid.—What says my Girl to this?</p>
			<p>You may well guess, my dear Father and Mother, how transporting these kind, these generous and condescending Sentiments were to me!—I thought I had the Harmony of the Spheres all around me; and every Word that dropt from his Lips, was as sweet as the Honey of <em>Hybla</em> to me.—Oh! Sir, said I, how inexpressibly kind and good is all this! Your poor Servant has a much greater Struggle than this to go thro’, a more knotty Difficulty to overcome.</p>
			<p>What is that? said he, a little impatiently: I will not forgive your Doubts now!—No, Sir, said I, I cannot doubt; but it is, how I shall <em>support</em>, how I shall <em>deserve</em>, your Goodness to me!—Dear Girl! said he, and hugg’d me to his Breast, I was afraid you would have made me angry again; but that I would not be; because I see you have a grateful Heart; and this your kind and chearful Return, after such cruel Usage as you had experienced in my House, enough to make you detest the Place, has made me resolve to bear any thing in you, but Doubts of my Honour, at a Time when I am pouring out my Soul, with a true and affectionate Ardour, before you.</p>
			<p>But, good Sir, said I, my greatest Concern will be for the rude Jests you will have to encounter with yourself, for thus stooping beneath yourself. For as to me, considering my lowly Estate, and little Merit, even the Slights and Reflections of the Ladies will be an Honour to me: And I shall have the Pride to place more than half their Ill-will, to their Envy at my Happiness. And if I can, by the most chearful Duty, and resigned Obedience, have the Pleasure to be agreeable to you, I shall think myself but too happy, let the World say what it will.</p>
			<p>He said, You are very good, my dearest Girl: But how will you bestow your Time, when you will have no Visits to receive or pay? No Parties of Pleasure to join in? No Card-tables to employ your Winter Evenings, and even, as the Taste is, half the Day, Summer and Winter? And you have often play’d with my Mother too, and so know how to perform a Part there, as well as in the other Diversions: And I’ll assure you, my Girl, I shall not desire you to live without such Amusements, as any Wife might expect, were I to marry a Lady of the first Quality.</p>
			<p>O, Sir, said I, you are all Goodness! How shall I bear it!—But do you think, Sir, in such a Family as yours, a Person, whom you shall honour with the Name of Mistress of it, will not find useful Employments for her Time, without looking abroad for any others?</p>
			<p>In the first Place, Sir, if you will give me Leave, I will myself look into such Parts of the Family Oeconomy, as may not be beneath the Rank to which I shall have the Favour of being exalted, if any such there can be; and this, I hope, without incurring the Ill-will of any <em>honest</em> Servant.</p>
			<p>Then, Sir, I will ease you of as much of your Family Accounts, as I possibly can, when I have convinced you, that I am to be trusted with them; and, you know, Sir, my late good Lady made me her Treasurer, her Almoner, and every thing.</p>
			<p>Then, Sir, if I must needs be visiting or visited, and the Ladies won’t honour me so much, or even if they <em>would</em> now-and-then, I will receive and pay Visits, if your Goodness will allow me so to do, to the sick Poor in the Neighbourhood around you; and administer to their Wants and Necessities, in such small Matters, as may not be hurtful to your Estate, but comfortable to them; and intail upon you their Blessings, and their Prayers for your dear Health and Welfare.</p>
			<p>Then I will assist your Housekeeper, as I used to do, in the making Jellies, Comfits, Sweetmeats, Marmalades, Cordials; and to pot, and candy, and preserve, for the Uses of the Family. And to make myself all the fine Linen of it, for yourself and me.</p>
			<p>Then, Sir, if you will sometimes indulge me with your Company, I will take an Airing in your Chariot now-and-then: And when you shall return home from your Diversions on the Green, or from the Chace, or where-ever you shall please to go, I shall have the Pleasure of receiving you with Duty, and a chearful Delight; and, in your Absence, count the Moments till you return; and you will, maybe, fill up the sweetest Part of my Time, with your agreeable Conversation, for an Hour or two now-and-then; and be indulgent to the impertinent Over-flowings of my grateful Heart, for all your Goodness to me.</p>
			<p>The Breakfasting-time, the Preparation for Dinner, and sometimes to entertain your chosen Friends, and the Company you shall bring home with you, Gentlemen, if not Ladies, and the Supperings, will fill up a great Part of the Day, in a very necessary manner.</p>
			<p>And, may-be, Sir, now and then a good-humour’d Lady will drop in; and, I hope, if they do, I shall so behave myself, as not to <em>add</em> to the Disgrace you will have brought upon yourself; for indeed, I will be very circumspect, and try to be as discreet as I can; and as humble too, as shall be consistent with your Honour.</p>
			<p>Cards, ’tis true, I can play at, in all the usual Games, that our Sex indulge in; but this I am not fond of, and shall never desire to use them, but as it may encourage such Ladies, as you may wish to see, not to abandon your House for want of an Amusement they are used to.</p>
			<p>Musick, which my good Lady taught me, will fill up some Intervals, if I should have any.</p>
			<p>And then, Sir, you know, I love Reading, and Scribbling; and tho’ all the latter will be employ’d in the Family Accounts, between the Servants and me, and me and your good Self; yet Reading is a Pleasure to me, that I shall be unwilling to give up, at proper times, for the best Company in the World, except yours. And, O Sir! that will help to polish my Mind, and make me worthier of your Company and Conversation; and, with the Explanations you will give me, of what I shall not understand, will be a sweet Employment, and Improvement too.</p>
			<p>But one thing, Sir, I ought not to forget, because it is the chief; my Duty to God, will, I hope, always employ some good Portion of my Time, with Thanks for his superlative Goodness to me; and to pray for <em>you</em> and <em>myself</em>: For <em>you</em>, Sir, for a Blessing on you, for your great Goodness to such an unworthy Creature: For <em>myself</em>, that I may be enabled to discharge my Duty to you, and be found grateful for all the Blessings I shall receive at the Hands of Providence, by means of your Generosity and Condescension.</p>
			<p>With all this, Sir, said I, can you think I shall be at a Loss to pass my Time? But, as I know, that every Slight to me, if I come to be so happy, will be, in some measure, a Slight to you, I will beg of you, Sir, not to let me go very fine in Dress; but appear only so, as that you may not be ashamed of it, after the Honour I shall have of being called by your worthy Name: For well I know, Sir, that nothing so much excites the Envy of my own Sex, as seeing a Person set above them in Appearance, and in Dress. And that would bring down upon me an hundred <em>sawcy Things</em>, and <em>low-born Brats</em>, and I can’t tell what!</p>
			<p>There I stopt; for I had prattled a great deal; and he said, clasping me to him, Why stops my dear <em>Pamela</em>?—Why does she not proceed? I could dwell upon your Words all the Day long; and you shall be the Directress of your own Pleasures, and your own Time, so sweetly do you chuse to employ it: And thus shall I find some of my own bad Actions aton’d for by your exemplary Goodness, and God will bless me for your sake!</p>
			<p>O, said he, what Pleasure you give me in this sweet Foretaste of my Happiness! I will now defy the sawcy, busy Censurers of the World, and bid them know your Excellence, and my Happiness, before they, with unhallow’d Lips, presume to judge of my Actions, and your Merit!—And, let me tell you, my <em>Pamela</em>, that I can add my Hopes of a still more pleasing Amusement; and what your bashful Modesty would not permit you to hint; and which I will no otherwise touch upon, lest it should seem, to your Nicety, to detract from the present Purity of my good Intentions, than to say, I hope to have superadded to all these, such an Employment, as will give me a View of perpetuating my happy Prospects, and my Family at the same time; of which I am almost the only Male.</p>
			<p>I blushed, I believe, yet could not be displeased at the decent and charming manner with which he insinuated this distant Hope: And Oh! judge for me, how my Heart was affected with all these things!</p>
			<p>He was pleased to add another charming Reflection, which shew’d me the noble Sincerity of his kind Professions. I do own to you, my <em>Pamela</em>, said he, that I love you with a purer Flame than ever I knew in my whole Life! A Flame, to which I was a Stranger, and which commenced for you in the Garden; tho’ you, unkindly, by your unseasonable Doubts, nipp’d the opening Bud, while it was too tender to bear the cold Blasts of Slight or Negligence. And I know more sincere Joy and Satisfaction in this sweet Hour’s Conversation with you, than all the guilty Tumults of my former Passion ever did, or (had even my Attempts succeeded) ever could have afforded me.</p>
			<p>O, Sir, said I, expect not Words, from your poor Servant, equal to these most generous Professions. Both the Means, and the Will, I now see, are given to you, to lay me under an everlasting Obligation! How happy shall I be, if, tho’ I cannot be worthy of all this Goodness and Condescension, I can prove myself not intirely unworthy of it! But I can only answer for a grateful Heart; and if ever I give you Cause wilfully, (and you will generously allow for <em>involuntary</em> Imperfections) to be disgusted with me, may I be an Out-cast from your House and Favour, and as much repudiated, as if the Law had divorced me from you!</p>
			<p>But, Sir, continued I, tho’ I was so unseasonable as I was in the Garden, you would, I flatter myself, had you then heard me, have pardon’d my Imprudence, and own’d I had some Cause to fear, and to wish to be with my poor Father and Mother; and this I the rather say, that you should not think me capable of returning Insolence for your Goodness; or appearing foolishly ungrateful to you, when you was so kind to me.</p>
			<p>Indeed, <em>Pamela</em>, said he, you gave me great Uneasiness; for I love you too well not to be jealous of the least Appearance of your Indifference to me, or Preference of any other Person, not excepting your Parents themselves. This made me resolve not to hear you; for I had not got over my Reluctance to Marriage; and a little Weight, you know, turns the Scale, when it hangs in an equal Balance. But yet, you see, that tho’ I could part with you, while my Anger held, yet the Regard I had then newly profess’d for your Virtue, made me resolve not to offer to violate it; and you have seen likewise, that the painful Struggle I underwent when I began to reflect, and to read your moving Journal, between my Desire to recal you, and my Doubt, that you would return, (tho’ yet I resolved not to force you to it) had like to have cost me a severe Illness: But your kind and chearful Return has dispelled all my Fears, and given me Hope, that I am not indifferent to you; and you see how your Presence has chas’d away my Illness.</p>
			<p>I bless God for it, said I; but since you are so good as to encourage me, and will not despise my Weakness, I will acknowledge, that I suffer’d more than I could have imagined, till I experienced it, in being banish’d your Presence in so much Anger; and the more still was I affected, when you answer’d so generously, the wicked Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> in my Favour, at my leaving your House: For this. Sir, awaken’d all my Reverence for you; and you saw I could not forbear, not knowing what I did, to break boldly in upon you, and acknowledge your Goodness on my Knees. ’Tis true, my dear <em>Pamela</em>, said he, we have sufficiently tortur’d one another; and the only Comfort that can result from it, will be, reflecting upon the Matter coolly and with Pleasure, when all these Storms are overblown, (as I hope they now are) and we sit together secur’d in each other’s good Opinion, recounting the uncommon Gradations, by which we have ascended to the Summit of that Felicity, which I hope we shall shortly arrive at.</p>
			<p>Mean-time, said the good Gentleman, let me hear what my dear Girl would have said in her Justification, could I have trusted myself with her, as to her Fears, and the Reason of her wishing herself from me, at a Time that I had begun to shew my Fondness for her, in a manner that I thought would have been agreeable to her and Virtue.</p>
			<p>I pulled out of my Pocket the Gypsey Letter; but I said, before I shew’d it to him, I have this Letter, Sir, to shew you, as what, I believe you will allow, must have given me the greatest Disturbance: But first, as I know not who is the Writer, and it seems to be in a disguis’d Hand, I would beg it as a Favour, that if you guess who it is, which I cannot, it may not turn to their Prejudice, because it was written very probably with no other View than to serve me.</p>
			<p>He took it, and read it. And it being signed <em>Somebody</em>, he said, Yes, this is indeed from <em>Somebody;</em> and, disguis’d as the Hand is, I know the Writer: Don’t you see by the Setness of some of these Letters, and a little Secretary Cut here and there, especially in that <em>c</em>, and that <em>r</em>, that it is the Hand of a Person bred in the Law-way? Why, <em>Pamela</em>, said he, ’tis old <em>Longman</em>’s Hand. An officious Rascal as he is!—But I have done with him! O Sir, said I, it would be too insolent in me to offer (so much am I myself overwhelm’d with your Goodness) to defend any body that you are angry with; yet, Sir, so far as they have incurr’d your Displeasure for my sake, and for no other Want of Duty or Respect, I could wish—But I dare not say more.—</p>
			<p>But, said he, as to the Letter, and the Information it contains:—Let me know, <em>Pamela</em>, when you receiv’d this? On the <em>Friday</em>, Sir, said I, that you was gone to the Wedding at <em>Stamford</em>. —How could it be convey’d to you, said he, unknown to Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, when I gave her such a strict Charge to attend you, and you yourself promis’d me, you would not throw yourself in the Way of such Intelligence! For, said he, when I went to <em>Stamford</em>, I knew from a private Intimation given me, that there would be an Attempt made to see you, or give you a Letter, by somebody, if not to get you away; but was not certain from what Quarter, whether from my Sister <em>Davers</em>, Mrs. <em>Jervis</em>, Mr. <em>Longman</em>, or <em>John Arnold</em>, or your Father; and as I was then but struggling with myself, whether to give way to my honourable Inclinations, or to free you, and let you go to your Father, that I might avoid the Danger I found myself in of the former (for I had absolutely resolved never to wound again even your Ears with any Proposals of a contrary Nature); that was the Reason I desir’d you to permit Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, to be so much on her Guard till I came back, when I thought I should have decided this disputed Point within myself, between my Pride and my Inclinations.</p>
			<p>This, good Sir, said I, accounts well to me, for your Conduct in that Case, and for what you said to me and Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> on that Occasion; and I see more and more how much I may depend upon your Honour and Goodness to me.—But I will tell you all the Truth. And then I recounted to him the whole Affair of the Gypsey, and how the Letter was put among the loose Grass, <em>&amp;c</em>. And he said, The Man who thinks a thousand Dragons sufficient to watch a Woman, when her Inclination takes a contrary Bent, will find all too little; and she will engage the Stones in the Street, or the Grass in the Field, to act for her, and help on her Correspondence. If the Mind, said he, be not engag’d, I see there is hardly any Confinement sufficient for the Body; and you have told me a very pretty Story; and, as you never gave me any Reason to question your Veracity, even in your severest Trials, I make no doubt of the Truth of what you have now mentioned. And I will in my Turn give you such a Proof of mine, that you shall find it carry Conviction with it.</p>
			<p>You must know then, my <em>Pamela</em>, that I had actually form’d such a Project, so well inform’d was this old rascally <em>Somebody;</em> and the Time was fix’d, for the very Person describ’d in this Letter, to be here; and I had thought he should have read some Part of the Ceremony (as little as was possible, to deceive you) in my Chamber; and so I hop’d to have you mine upon Terms that then would have been much more agreeable to me than real Matrimony. And I did not in Haste intend you the Mortification of being undeceiv’d; so that we might have liv’d for Years, perhaps, very lovingly together; and I had, at the same time been at Liberty to confirm or abrogate it, as I pleas’d.</p>
			<p>O Sir, said I, I am out of Breath with the Thoughts of my Danger. But what good Angel prevented this deep-laid Design to be executed?</p>
			<p>Why, <em>your</em> good Angel, <em>Pamela</em>, said he; for when I began to consider that it would have made you miserable, and me not happy; that if you should have a dear little one, it would be out of my own Power to legitimate it, if I should wish it to inherit my Estate; and that, as I am almost the last of my Family, and most of what I possess must descend to a strange Line, and disagreeable and unworthy Persons; notwithstanding that I might, in this Case, have Issue of my own Body: When I further consider’d your untainted Virtue, what Dangers and Trials you had undergone, by my Means, and what a world of Troubles I had involv’d you in, only because you were beautiful and virtuous, which had excited all my Passion for you; and reflected also upon your try’d Prudence and Truth, I, tho’ I doubted not effecting this my last Plot, resolv’d to overcome myself; and however I might suffer in struggling with my Affection for you, to part with you, rather than to betray you under so black a Veil. Besides, said he, I remember’d how much I had exclaim’d against and censur’d an Action of this kind, that had been attributed to one of the first Men of the Law, and of the Kingdom, as he afterwards became; and that it was but treading in a Path that another had mark’d out for me; and, as I was assur’d, with no great Satisfaction to himself, when he came to reflect; my foolish Pride was a little piqu’d with this, because I lov’d to be, if I was out of the way, my own Original, as I may call it: On all these Considerations it was, that I rejected this Project, and sent Word to the Person, that I had better consider’d of the Matter, and would not have him come, till he heard farther from me: And, in this Suspense, I suppose, some of your Confederates, <em>Pamela</em>, (for we have been a Couple of Plotters, tho’ your Virtue and Merit have engag’d you faithful Friends and Partisans, which my Money and Promises could hardly do) one way or other got Knowledge of it, and gave you this Notice; but perhaps, it would have come too late, had not your white Angel got the better of my black one, and inspir’d me with Resolutions to abandon the Project just as it was to be put in Execution. But yet I own, that, from these Appearances, you was but too well justify’d in your Fears, on this odd way of coming at this Intelligence; and I have only one thing to blame you for, that tho’ I was resolv’d not to hear you in your own Defence, yet, as you have so ready a Talent at your Pen, you might have clear’d your Part of this Matter up to me by a Line or two; and when I had known what seeming good Grounds you had for pouring cold Water on a young Flame, that was just then rising to an honourable Expansion, I should not have imputed it, as I was apt to do, to unseasonable Insult for my Tenderness to you on one hand; to perverse Nicety on the other; or to, what I was most alarm’d by, and concern’d for. Prepossession for some other Person. And this would have sav’d us both much Fatigue, I of Mind, you of Body.</p>
			<p>And indeed, Sir, said I, of <em>Mind</em> too; and I could not better manifest this, than by the Chearfulness with which I obey’d your Recalling me to your Presence.</p>
			<p>Ay, that my dear <em>Pamela</em>, said he, and clasp’d me in his Arms, was the kind, the inexpressibly kind Action that has rivetted my Affections to you, and gives me to pour out, in this free and unreserv’d manner, my whole Soul in your Bosom.</p>
			<p>I said, I had the less Merit in this my Return, because I was driven by an irresistible Impulse to it, and could not help it if I would.</p>
			<p>This, said he, (and honour’d me, by kissing my Hand) is engaging indeed, if I may hope that my <em>Pamela</em>’s gentle Inclination for her Persecutor, was the strongest Motive to her Return; and I so much value a voluntier Love, in the Person I would wish for my Wife, that I would have even Prudence and Interest, hardly nam’d, in Comparison with it. And can you return me sincerely the honest Compliment I now make you, that as in the Act that I hope shall soon unite us together, it is impossible that I should have any View to my Interest; and, that Love, true Love, is the <em>only</em> Motive by which I am directed; that, were I not what I am, you could give me the Preference to any other Person in the World that you know, notwithstanding all that has pass’d between us? Why, said I, should your so much obligated <em>Pamela</em> refuse to answer this kind Question? Cruel, as I have thought you, and dangerous your Views to my Honesty; You, Sir, are the only Person living that ever was more than indifferent to me; and before I knew this was what I blush now to call it, I could not hate you, or wish you ill, tho’ from my Soul, the Attempts you made, were shocking and most distasteful to me.</p>
			<p>I am satisfy’d, my <em>Pamela</em>, said he; nor do I want to see those Papers that you have kindly written for to your Father; tho’ I still wish to see them too, for the sake of the sweet manner in which you write your Sentiments; and to have before me the whole Series of your Sufferings, that I may know whether all my future Kindness is able to recompense you for them.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>In this manner, my dear Father and Mother, did your happy Daughter find herself bless’d by her generous Master! An ample Recompence for all her Sufferings, did I think this sweet Conversation only. A hundred tender Things he express’d besides, that tho’ they never can escape my Memory, yet would be too tedious to write down. O how I bless’d God, and, I hope, ever shall, for all his gracious Favours to his unworthy Handmaid! What a happy Change is this. And who knows but my kind, my generous Master may put it in my Power, when he shall see me not quite unworthy of it, to be a Means, without injuring him, to dispense around me, to many Persons, the happy Influences of the Condition to which I shall be, by his kind Favour, exalted? Doubly blest shall I be, in particular, if I can return the hundredth Part of the Obligations I owe to such honest good Parents, to whose pious Instructions and Examples, under God, I owe all my present Happiness and future Prospects.—O the Joy that fills my Mind on these proud Hopes! on these delightful Prospects!—It is too mighty for me; and I must sit down to ponder all these Things, and to admire and bless the Goodness of that Providence, which has, thro’ so many intricate Mazes, made me tread the Paths of Innocence, and so amply rewarded me, for what it has itself enabled me do! All Glory to God alone be ever given for it, by your poor enraptur’d Daughter!—</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>I will now continue my most pleasing Relation.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>As the Chariot was returning home from this sweet Airing, he said, From all that has pass’d between us, in this pleasing Turn, my <em>Pamela</em> will see, and will believe, that the Trials to her Virtue are all over from me: But perhaps, there will be some few yet to come to her Patience and Humility. For I have, at the earnest Importunity of Lady <em>Darnford</em>, and her Daughters, promised them a Sight of my beloved Girl: And so I intend to have their whole Family, and Lady <em>Jones</em>, and Mrs. <em>Peters</em>’s Family, to dine with me once in a few Days. And as I believe you would hardly chuse at present to grace the Table on the Occasion, till you can do it in your own Right, I would be glad you will not refuse coming down to us, if I desire it; for I would preface our Nuptials, said the dear Gentleman! O what a sweet Word was that!—with the good Opinion of these Gentry of your Merits, and to see you, and your sweet Manner, will be enough for that Purpose; and so, by degrees, prepare my Neighbours for what is to follow: And they already have your Character from me, and are dispos’d to admire you.</p>
			<p>Sir, said I, after all that has pass’d, I should be unworthy if I could not say, that I <em>can</em> have no Will but yours; and however awkwardly I shall behave in such Company, weigh’d down with the Sense of your Obligations, on one Side, and my own Unworthiness, with their Observations, on the other, I will not scruple to obey you.</p>
			<p>I am oblig’d to you, <em>Pamela</em>, said he; and pray be only dress’d as you are; for, as they know your Condition, and I have told them the Story of your present Dress, and how you came by it, one of the young Ladies begs it as a Favour, that they may see you just as you are: And I am the rather pleas’d it should be so, because they will perceive you owe nothing to Dress, and make a much better Figure with your own native Stock of Loveliness, than the greatest Ladies do in the most splendid Attire, and stuck out with the most glittering Jewels.</p>
			<p>O Sir, said I, your Goodness beholds your poor Servant in a Light greatly beyond her Merit! But it must not be expected that others, Ladies especially, will look at me with your favourable Eyes: But, nevertheless, I should be best pleas’d to wear always this humble Garb, till you, for your own sake, shall order it otherwise: For, oh! Sir, said I, I hope it will be always my Pride to glory most in your Goodness; and it will be a Pleasure to me to shew every one, that, with respect to my Happiness in this Life, I am intirely the Work of your Bounty; and to let the World see from what a lowly Original you have rais’d me to Honours, that the greatest Ladies would rejoice in.</p>
			<p>Admirable <em>Pamela</em>, said he, excellent Girl!——Surely thy Sentiments are superior to those of all thy Sex!—I might have <em>addressed</em> a hundred fine Ladies; but never, surely, could have had Reason to <em>admire</em> one as I do you.</p>
			<p>As, my dear Father and Mother, I repeat these generous Sayings, only as they are the Effect of my Master’s Goodness, and am far from presuming to think I deserve one of them; so I hope you will not attribute it to my Vanity; for, I do assure you, I think I ought rather to be more <em>humble</em>, as I am more <em>oblig’d</em>: For it must be always a Sign of a poor Condition to receive Obligations one cannot repay; as it is of a rich Mind, when it can confer them, without expecting or <em>needing</em> a Return. It is, on one side, the State of the human Creature compar’d, on the other, to the Creator; and so, with due Deference, may be said to be God-like, and that is the highest that can be said.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>The Chariot brought us home at near the Hour of Two, and, blessed be God, my Master is pure and well, and chearful; and that makes me hope he does not repent him of his Goodness. He handed me out of the Chariot, and to the Parlour, with the same Goodness, that he shew’d when he put me in it, before several of the Servants. Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> came to inquire how he did. Quite well, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said he, quite well; I thank God, and this good Girl, for it!—I am glad of it, said she; but I hope you are not the worse for my Care, and my Doctoring you!—No, but the better Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said he, you have much oblig’d me by both.</p>
			<p>Then he said, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, you and I have used this good Girl very hardly—I was afraid, Sir, said she, I should be the Subject of her Complaints.—I assure you, said he, she has not open’d her Lips about you. We have had quite a different Subject to talk of; and I hope she will forgive us both: you especially, she must; because you have done nothing but by my Orders. But I only mean, that the necessary Consequence of those Orders has been very grievous to my <em>Pamela</em>: And now comes our Part to make her Amends, if we can.</p>
			<p>Sir, said she, I always said to Madam, (as she call’d me) that you was very good, and very forgiving. No, said he, I have been stark naught, and it is she, I hope, will be very forgiving. But all this Preamble is to tell you, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, that now I desire you’ll study to oblige her, as much as (to obey me) you was forc’d to disoblige her before. And you’ll remember, that in every thing she is to be her own Mistress.</p>
			<p>Yes, said she, and mine too, I suppose, Sir? Ay, said the generous Gentleman, I believe it will be so in a little Time.—Then, said she, I know how it will go with me! And so put her Handkerchief to her Eyes.—<em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, comfort poor Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>.</p>
			<p>This was very generous, already to seem to put her in my Power; and I took her by the Hand, and said, I shall never take upon myself, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, to make a bad Use of any Opportunities that may be put into my Hands, by my generous Master; nor shall I ever wish to do you Prejudice, if I might: For I shall consider, that what you have done, was in Obedience to a Will which it will become me also to submit to; and so, tho’ we shall be acted very differently as to the Effects, yet as these Effects proceed from one Cause, it shall be always reverenced by me.</p>
			<p>See there, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said my Master, we are both in generous Hands; and indeed, if she did not pardon you, I should think she but half forgave me, because you acted by my Instructions.—Well, said she, God bless you both together, since it must be so; and I will double my Diligence to oblige my Lady, as I find she will soon be.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>O my dear Father and Mother, now pray for me on another Score! for fear I should grow too proud, and be giddy and foolish with all these promising Things, so soothing to the Vanity of my Years and Sex. But even to this Hour can I pray, that God would remove from me all these delightful Prospects, if they should so corrupt my Mind, as to make me proud, and vain, and not acknowledge, with thankful Humility, the blessed Providence which has so visibly conducted me thro’ the dangerous Paths I have trod, to this happy Moment.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>My Master was pleas’d to say, that he thought I might as well dine with him, as he was alone. But, I said, I begg’d he would excuse me, for fear so much Excess of Goodness and Condescension, all at once, should turn my Head; and that he would by slower Degrees bring on my Happiness, lest I should not know how to bear it.</p>
			<p>Persons that doubt themselves, said he, seldom do amiss. And if there was any Fear of what you say, you could not have had it in your Thoughts: For none but the Presumptuous, the Conceited, and the Thoughtless, err capitally. But nevertheless, said he, I have such an Opinion of your Prudence, that I shall generally think what you do right, because it is you that do it.</p>
			<p>Sir, said I, your kind Expressions shall not be thrown away upon me, if I can help it; for they will task me, with the Care of endeavouring to deserve your good Opinion, and your Approbation, as the best Rule of my Conduct.</p>
			<p>Being then about to go up Stairs, Permit me, Sir, said I, (looking about me, with some Confusion, to see nobody was there) thus on my Knees to thank you, as I often wanted to do in the Chariot, for all your Goodness to me, which shall never, I hope, be cast away upon me. And so I had the Boldness to kiss his Hand.</p>
			<p>I wonder, since how I came to be so forward; but what could I do?—My poor grateful Heart was like a too full River, which overflows its Banks; and it carry’d away my Fear and my Shamefacedness, as that does all before it, on the Surface of the Waters!</p>
			<p>He clasp’d me in his Arms, with Transport, and condescendingly kneel’d by me, and kissing me, said, O my dear obliging good Girl, on my Knee, as you on yours, I vow to you everlasting Truth and Fidelity; and may God but bless us both with half the Pleasures that seem to lie before us, and we shall have no Reason to envy the Felicity of the greatest Princes! O Sir, said I, how shall I support so much Goodness!—I am poor, indeed, in <em>every thing</em>, compar’d to you! And how far, very far, do you, in every generous Way, leave me behind you!</p>
			<p>He rais’d me, and as I bent towards the Door, led me to the Stairs Foot, and saluting me there again, I went up to my Closet, and threw myself on my Knees in Raptures of Joy, and bless’d that gracious God, who had thus chang’d my Distress to Happiness, and so abundantly rewarded me for all the Sufferings I had pass’d thro’.—And Oh! how light, how very light, do all those Sufferings <em>now</em> appear, which <em>then</em> my repining Mind made so formidable to me!—Hence, in every State of Life, and in all the Changes and Chances of it, for the future, will I trust in Providence, who knows what is best for us, and frequently turns the very Evils we most dread, to be the Causes of our Happiness, and of our Deliverance from greater!—My Experiences, young as I am, as to this great Point of Reliance in God, are strong, tho’ my Judgment in general may be weak and unformed; but you’ll excuse these Reflections, because they are your beloved Daughter’s; and, so far as they are not amiss, derive themselves from the Benefit of yours and my late good Lady’s Examples and Instructions.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>I have wrote a vast deal in a little Time. And shall only say, to conclude this delightful <em>Wednesday</em>, That in the Afternoon my good Master was so well, that he rode out on Horseback, and came home about Nine at Night; and then came up to me, and seeing me with Pen and Ink before me in my Closet, said, I come only to tell you I am very well, my <em>Pamela</em>, and, as I have a Letter or two to write, I will leave you to proceed in yours, as I suppose that was your Employment; (for I had put by my Paper at his coming up) and so he saluted me, bid me Good-night, and went down; and I finish’d down to this Place before I went to-bed. Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> told me, if it was more agreeable to me, she would lie in another Room; but I said, No thank you, Mrs. <em>Jewkes;</em> pray let me have your Company And she made me a fine Curchee, and thank’d me.—How Times are alter’d!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="section">
			<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Thursday</em>.</h2>
			<p class="first"><span class="first-word">This</span> Morning my Master came up to me, and talk’d with me on various Subjects for a good while together in the most kind manner. Among other Things, he ask’d me, if I chose to order any new Cloaths against my Marriage; (O how my Heart flutters when he mentions this Subject so freely!) I said, I left every thing to his good Pleasure, only repeating my Request, for the Reasons afore-given, that I might not be too fine.</p>
			<p>He said, I think, my Dear, it shall be very private: I hope you are not afraid of a Sham-marriage; and pray get the Service by Heart, that you may see nothing is omitted. I glow’d between Shame and Delight. O how I felt my Cheeks burn!</p>
			<p>I said I fear’d nothing, I apprehended nothing, but my own Unworthiness. Said he, I think it shall be done within these Fourteen Days, from this Day, at this House. O how I trembled; but not with Grief, you may believe!—What says my Girl? Have you to object against any Day of the next Fourteen? because my Affairs require me to go to my other House, and I think not to stir from this, till I am happy in you?</p>
			<p>I have no Will but yours, said I, (all glowing like the Fire, as I could feel:) But, Sir, did you say in the <em>House?</em> Ay, said he; for I care not how privately it be done; and it must be very publick if we go to Church. It is a <em>Holy Rite</em>, Sir, said I, and would be better, methinks, in a <em>Holy Place</em>.</p>
			<p>I see, (said he, most kindly) my lovely Maid’s Confusion; and your trembling Tenderness shews, I ought to oblige you all I may. Therefore, I will order my own little Chapel, which has not been us’d for two Generations, for any thing but a Lumber-room, because our Family seldom resided here long together, to be clear’d and clean’d, and got ready for the Ceremony, if you dislike your own Chamber, or mine.</p>
			<p>Sir, said I, that will be better than the Chamber; and I hope it will never be lumber’d again, but kept to the Use, for which, as I <em>presume</em>, it has been consecrated. O yes, said he, it has been consecrated, and that many Ages ago, in my Great Great-grandfather’s Time, who built that and the good old House together.</p>
			<p>But now, my good Girl, if I do not too much add to your sweet Confusion, shall it be in the first Seven Days, or the second, of this Fortnight? I look’d down, quite out of Countenance. Tell me, said he?</p>
			<p>In the Second, if you please, Sir, said I.—As <em>you</em> please, said he, most kindly; but I should thank you, <em>Pamela</em>, if you chuse the first. I’d <em>rather</em>, Sir, if you please, said I, have the second. Well, said he, be it so; but don’t defer it to the last Day of the Fourteen.</p>
			<p>Pray, Sir, said I, since you embolden me to talk on this important Subject, may I not send my dear Father and Mother word of my Happiness?—Yes, you may, said he; but charge them to keep it secret, till you or I direct the contrary. And I told you I would see no more of your Papers; but I meant, I would not without your Consent: But if you will shew them to me, (and now I have no other Motive for my Curiosity, but the Pleasure I take in reading what you write) I shall acknowledge it as a Favour.</p>
			<p>If, Sir, said I, you will be pleas’d to let me write over again one Sheet, I will, tho’ I had rely’d upon your Word, and not wrote them for your Perusal. What is that, said he? tho’ I cannot consent to it beforehand: For I more desire to see them, because they are your true Sentiments at <em>the Time</em>, and because they were <em>not</em> written for my Perusal. Sir, said I, What I am loth you should see, are very severe Reflections on the Letter I receiv’d by the Gypsey, when I apprehended your Design of the Sham-marriage; tho’ there are other things I would not have you see; but that is the worst. It can’t be worse, said he, my dear Sauce-box, than I have seen already; and, I will allow your treating me in ever so black a Manner on that Occasion, because it must have a very black Appearance to you.—Well, Sir, said I, I think I will obey you, before Night. But don’t alter a Word, said he. I won’t, Sir, reply’d I, since you order it.</p>
			<p>While we were talking, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> came up, and said <em>Thomas</em> was return’d. O, said my Master, let him bring up the Papers. For he hop’d, and so did I, that you had sent them by him. But it was a great Balk, when he came up and said, Sir, Mr. <em>Andrews</em> did not care to deliver them; and would have it, that his Daughter was forc’d to write that Letter to him: And indeed, Sir, said he, the old Gentleman took on sadly, and would have it that his Daughter was undone, or else, he said, she would not have turn’d back, when on her Way, (as I told him she did, said <em>Thomas</em>) instead of coming to them. I began to be afraid now that all would be bad for me again.</p>
			<p>Well, <em>Tom</em>, said he, don’t mince the Matter. Tell me, before Mrs. <em>Andrews</em>, what they said. Why, Sir, both he and <em>Goody Andrews</em>, after they had conferr’d together upon <em>your</em> Letter, Madam, came out, weeping bitterly, that griev’d my very Heart; and they said, Now all was over with their poor Daughter; and either she had wrote that Letter by Compulsion, or had yielded to your Honour, so they said, and was, or would be ruin’d!</p>
			<p>My Master seem’d vex’d, as I fear’d. And I said, Pray, Sir, be so good to excuse the Fears of my honest Parents! They cannot know your Goodness to me.</p>
			<p>And so, (said he, without answering me,) they refus’d to deliver the Papers? Yes, and please your Honour, said <em>Thomas</em>, tho’ I told them, that you, Madam, of your own Accord, on a Letter I had brought you, very chearfully wrote what I carry’d. But the old Gentleman, said, Why, Wife, there are in these Papers twenty Things nobody should see but ourselves, and especially not the ’Squire. O the poor Girl has had so many Stratagems to contend with, that now, at last, she has met with one that has been too hard for her. And can it be possible for us to account for her setting out to come to us, in such Post-haste, and when she had got above Halfway, to send us this Letter, and to go back again of her own Accord, as you say; when we know that all her Delight would have been to come to us, and to escape from the Perils she has been so long contending with? And then, and please your Honour, he said, he could not bear this; for his Daughter was ruin’d, to be sure, before now. And so, said he, the good old Couple sat themselves down, and Hand-in-hand, leaning upon each other’s Shoulder, did nothing but lament.—I was, said he, piteously griev’d; but all I could say could not comfort them; nor would they give me the Papers; tho’ I told them I should deliver them only to Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> herself. And so, and please your Honour, I was forced to come away without them.</p>
			<p>My good Master saw me all bath’d in Tears at this Description of your Distress and Fears for me, and he said, I would not have you take on so. I am not angry with your Father in the main; he is a good Man; and I would have you write out of Hand, and it shall be sent by the Post, to Mr. <em>Atkins</em>, who lives within two Miles of your Father, and I’ll inclose it in a Cover of mine, in which I’ll desire Mr. <em>Atkins</em>, the Moment it comes to his Hand, to convey it safely to your Father or Mother: And say nothing of their sending the Papers, that it may not make them uneasy; for I want not now to see them on any other Score than that of mere Curiosity; and that will do at any Time. And so saying, he saluted me, before <em>Thomas</em>, and with his own Handkerchief wip’d my Eyes; and said to <em>Thomas</em>, The good old Folks are not to be blam’d in the main. They don’t know my honourable Intentions by their dear Daughter: Who, <em>Tom</em>, will, in a little Time, be your Mistress; tho’ I shall keep the Matter private some Days, and would not have it spoken of by my Servants out of my House.</p>
			<p><em>Thomas</em> said, God bless your Honour. You know best. And I said, O Sir, you are all Goodness!—How kind is this, to forgive the Disappointment, instead of being angry, as I fear’d you would. <em>Thomas</em> then withdrew. And my Master said, I need not remind you of writing out of Hand, to make the good Folks easy: And I will leave you to yourself for that Purpose; only send me down such of your Papers, as you are willing I should see, with which I shall entertain myself for an Hour or two. But one Thing, added he, I forgot to tell you, the neighbouring Gentry I mentioned, will be here to-morrow to dine with me; and I have order’d Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> to prepare for them. And <em>must I</em>, Sir, said I, be shewn to them? O yes, said he, that’s the chief Reason of their coming. And you’ll see no body equal to yourself; don’t be concern’d.</p>
			<div class="blockquote">
				<p>I open’d my Papers, as soon as my Master had left me, and laid out those beginning on the <em>Thursday</em> Morning he set out for <em>Stamford</em>, with the Morning Visit he made me before I was up, and the Injunctions of Watchfulness, &amp;<em>c</em>. to Mrs. <em>Jewkes;</em> the next Day’s Gypsey Affair, and my Reflections, in which I call’d him <em>truly diabolical</em>, and was otherwise very severe, on the strong Appearances the Matter had then against him. His Return on <em>Saturday</em>, with the Dread he put me in, on the offering to search me for my Papers which followed those he had got by Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>’s Means. My being forc’d to give them up. His Carriage to me after he had read them; and Questions to me. His great Kindness to me on seeing the Dangers I had escap’d, and the Troubles I had undergone. And how I unseasonably, in the midst of his Goodness, express’d my Desire of being sent to you, having the Intelligence of a Sham-marriage, from the Gypsey, in my Thoughts. How this inrag’d him, and made him turn me that very <em>Sunday</em> out of his House, and send me on my Way to you. The Particulars of my Journey, and my Grief at parting with him; and my free Acknowledgments to you, that I found, unknown to myself, I had begun to love him, and could not help it. His sending after me, to beg my Return; but yet generously leaving me at my Liberty, when he might have forc’d me to return whether I was willing or not. My Resolution to oblige him, and fatiguing Journey back. My Concern for his Illness on my Return. His kind Reception of me, and shewing me his Sister <em>Davers</em>’s angry Letter, against his Behaviour to me, desiring him to set me free, and threatening to renounce him as a Brother if he should degrade himself by marrying me. My serious Reflections on this Letter, &amp;<em>c</em>. (all which, I hope, with the others, you will shortly see) and this carry’d Matters down to <em>Tuesday</em> Night last.</p>
			</div>
			<p>All that follow’d was so kind of his Side, being our Chariot Conference, as above, on <em>Wednesday</em> Morning, and how good he has been ever since, that I thought I would go no farther; for I was a little asham’d to be so very open on that tender and most grateful Subject; tho’ his great Goodness to me deserves all the Acknowledgments I can possibly make.</p>
			<p>And when I had look’d these out, I carried them down myself into the Parlour to him, and said, putting them into his Hands, Your Allowances, good Sir, as heretofore; and if I have been too open and free in my Reflections or Declarations; let my Fears on one Side, and my Sincerity on the other, be my Excuse. You are very obliging, my good Girl, said he. You have nothing to apprehend from my Thoughts, any more than from my Actions.</p>
			<p>So I went up, and wrote the Letter to you, briefly acquainting you with my present Happiness, and my Master’s Goodness, and expressing that Gratitude of Heart, which I owe to the kindest Gentleman in the World, and assuring you, that I should soon have the Pleasure of sending back to you, not only those Papers, but all that succeeded them to this Time, as I know you delight to amuse yourself in your Leisure Hours with my Scribble; and I said, carrying it down to my Master, before I seal’d it, Will you please, Sir, to take the Trouble of reading what I write to my dear Parents? Thank you <em>Pamela</em>, said he, and set me on his Knee, while he read it, and seem’d much pleas’d with it, and giving it me again, you are very happy, said he, my beloved Girl, in your Style and Expressions: And the affectionate Things you say of me, are inexpressibly obliging; and again, with this Kiss, said he, do I confirm for Truth all that you have promis’d for my Intentions in this Letter.—O what Halcyon Days are these? God continue them!—A Change now, would kill me quite.</p>
			<p>He went out in his Chariot in the Afternoon; and in the Evening return’d, and sent me Word, he would be glad of my Company for a little Walk in the Garden; and down I went that very Moment.</p>
			<p>He came to meet me. So, said he, how does my dear Girl do now?—Who do you think I have seen since I have been out?—I don’t know, Sir, said I. Why, said he, there is a Turning in the Road, about five Miles off, that goes round a Meadow, that has a pleasant Footway, by the Side of a little Brook, and a double Row of Limes on each Side, where now and then the Gentry in the Neighbourhood, walk, and angle, and divert themselves—I’ll shew it you next Opportunity—And I stept out of my Chariot, to walk cross this Meadow, and bid <em>Robin</em> meet me with it on the further Part of it. And who should I ’spy there, walking, with a Book in his Hand, reading, but your humble Servant Mr. <em>Williams?</em>—Don’t blush, <em>Pamela</em>, said he—As his Back was to me, I thought I would speak to the Man, and before he saw me, I said, How do you, old Acquaintance? (for, said he, you know we were of one College for a Twelvemonth). I thought the Man would have jump’d into the Brook, he gave such a Start at hearing my Voice, and seeing me.</p>
			<p>Poor Man! said I. Ay, said he, but not too much of your poor Man, in that soft Accent, neither, <em>Pamela</em>.—Said I, I am sorry my Voice is so startling to you, Mr. <em>Williams</em>. What are you reading? Sir, said he, and stammer’d with the Surprize, It is the <em>French Telemachus</em>; for I am about perfecting myself, if I can, in the <em>French</em> Tongue—Thought I, I had rather so, than perfecting my <em>Pamela</em> in it.—You do well, reply’d I.—Don’t you think that yonder Cloud may give us a small Shower? and it did a little begin to wet.—He said, he believ’d not much.</p>
			<p>If, said I, you are for the Village, I’ll give you a Cast; for I shall call at Sir <em>Simon</em>’s, in my Return from the little Round I am taking. He ask’d me If it was not too great a Favour?—No, said I, don’t talk of that; let us walk to the further Opening there, and we shall meet my Chariot.</p>
			<p>So, <em>Pamela</em>, continued my Master, we fell into Conversation, as we walk’d. He said, he was very sorry he had incurr’d my Displeasure; and the more, as he had been told, by Lady <em>Jones</em>, who had it from Sir <em>Simon</em>’s Family, that I had a more honourable View than at first was apprehended. I said, We Fellows of Fortune, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, take sometimes a little more Liberty with the World than we ought to do; wantoning, very probably, as you contemplative Folks would say, in the Sun-beams of a dangerous Affluence, and cannot think of confining ourselves to the common Paths, tho’ the safest and most eligible, after all. And you may believe I could not very well like to be supplanted in a View that lay next my Heart; and that by an old Acquaintance, whose Good, before this Affair, I was studious to promote.</p>
			<p>I would only say, Sir, said he, that my <em>first</em> Motive was intirely such as became my Function: And, very politely, said my Master, he added, And I am very sure, that however inexcusable I might seem in the <em>Progress</em> of the Matter, yourself, Sir, would have been sorry to have it said, you had cast your Thoughts on a Person, that nobody could have wish’d for but yourself.</p>
			<p>Well, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, said I, I see you are a Man of Gallantry as well as Religion: But what I took most amiss was, that, if you thought me doing a wrong Thing, you did not expostulate with me, as your Function might allow you, upon it; but immediately determin’d to counterplot me, and to turn as much an Intriguer for a Parson, as I was for a Laick, and attempt to secure to yourself a Prize, you would have robb’d me of, and that from my own House. But the Matter is at an End, and I retain not any Malice upon it, tho’ you did not <em>know</em>, but I should, at last, do honourably by her, as I actually intend.</p>
			<p>I am sorry for myself, Sir, said he, that I should so unhappily incur your Displeasure; but I rejoice for her sake in your honourable Intentions: Give me Leave only to say, That if you make Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> your Lady, she will do Credit to your Choice with every body that sees her, or comes to know her; and for Person and Mind both, you may challenge the County.</p>
			<p>In this manner, said my Master, did the Parson and I confabulate; and I set him down at his Lodgings in the Village. But he kept your Secret, <em>Pamela</em>, and would not own, that you gave Encouragement to his Address as to Matrimony.</p>
			<p>Indeed, Sir, said I, he could not say that I did; and I hope you believe me. I do, I do, said he; but ’tis still my Opinion, that if, when I saw Plots set up against my Plots, I had not, as I had, discover’d the Parson, it might have gone to a Length that would have put our present Situation out of both our Powers.</p>
			<p>Sir, said I, when you consider that my utmost Presumption could not make me hope for the Honour you now seem to design me; that therefore, I had no Prospect before me but Dishonour; and was so hardly us’d into the Bargain, I should have seem’d very little in Earnest in my Professions of Honesty, if I had not endeavour’d to get away: But yet I resolv’d not to think of Marriage; for I never saw the Man I could love, till your Goodness embolden’d me to look up to you.</p>
			<p>I should, my dear <em>Pamela</em>, said he, make a very ill Compliment to my Vanity, if I did not believe you; tho’ at the same time, Justice calls upon me to own, that it is, all Things consider’d, beyond my Merit.</p>
			<p>There was a sweet noble Expression for your poor Daughter, my dear Father and Mother!—And from my Master too!</p>
			<p>I was glad to hear this Account of the Interview between Mr. <em>Williams</em> and himself; but I dar’d not to say so. I hope in Time he will be re-instated in his good Graces.</p>
			<p>He was so good as to tell me, he had given Orders for the Chapel to be clear’d. O how I look forward with inward Joy, yet with Fear and Trembling!</p>
		</div>
		<div class="section">
			<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Friday</em>.</h2>
			<p class="first"><span class="first-word">About</span> Twelve o’Clock came Sir <em>Simon</em>, and his Lady and two Daughters, and Lady <em>Jones</em>, and a Sister-in-law of hers, and Mr. <em>Peters</em>, and his Spouse and Niece. Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, who is more and more obliging, was much concern’d I was not dress’d in some of my best Cloaths, and made me many Compliments.</p>
			<p>They all went into the Garden for a Walk, before Dinner, and, I understood, were so impatient to see me, that my Master took them into the largest Alcove, after they had walk’d two or three Turns, and stept himself to me. Come, my <em>Pamela</em>, said he, the Ladies can’t be satisfy’d without seeing you, and I desire you’ll come. I said, I was asham’d; but I would obey him. Said he, The two young Ladies are dress’d out in their best Attire; but they make not such an Appearance as my charming Girl in this ordinary Garb.—Sir, said I, shan’t I follow you there? for I can’t bear you should do me so much Honour. Well, said he, I’ll go before you. And he bid Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> bring a Bottle or two of Sack, and some Cake. So he went down to them.</p>
			<p>This Alcove fronts the longest Gravel Walk in the Garden, so that they saw me all the Way I came, for a good Way; and my Master told me afterwards, with Pleasure, all they said of me.</p>
			<p>Will you forgive the little vain Slut your Daughter, if I tell you all, as he was pleas’d to tell me? He said, ’spying me first, Look there, Ladies, comes my pretty Rustick!—They all, I saw, which dash’d me, stood at the Windows and in the Door-way, looking full at me.</p>
			<p>My Master told me, that Lady <em>Jones</em> said, She is a charming Creature, I see that, at this Distance. And Sir <em>Simon</em>, it seems, who has been a sad Rake in his younger Days, swore he never saw so easy an Air, so fine a Shape, and so graceful a Presence.—The Lady <em>Darnford</em> said, I was a sweet Girl. And Mrs. <em>Peters</em> said very handsome Things. Even the Parson said, I should be the Pride of the County. O dear Sirs! all this was owing to the Light my good Master’s Favour plac’d me in, which made me shine out in their Eyes beyond my Deserts. He said the young Ladies blush’d, and envy’d me.</p>
			<p>When I came near, he saw me dash’d and confus’d and was so good to meet me, Give me your Hand, said he, my good Girl, you walk too fast (for indeed I wanted to be out of their gazing). I did so, with a Curchee, and he led me up the Steps of the Alcove, and in a most Gentleman-like Manner presented me to the Ladies, and they all saluted me, and said, They hop’d to be better acquainted with me; and Lady <em>Darnford</em> was pleas’d to say, I should be the Flower of their Neighbourhood. Sir <em>Simon</em> said, Good Neighbour, by your Leave, and saluting me, added, Now will I say, that I have kiss’d the loveliest Maiden in <em>England</em>. But for all this, methought I ow’d him a Grudge for a Tell-tale, tho’ all had turn’d out so happily. Mr. <em>Peters</em> very gravely follow’d his Example, and said, like a Bishop, God bless you, fair Excellence. Said Lady <em>Jones</em>, Pray, dear Madam, sit down by me. And they all sat down; but I said, I would stand, if they pleas’d. No, <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, Pray sit down with these good Ladies, my Neighbours:—They will indulge it to you, for <em>my</em> sake, till they know you better; and for <em>your own</em>, when they are acquainted with you. Sir, said I, I shall be proud to deserve their Indulgence.</p>
			<p>They all so gaz’d at me, that I could not look up; for I think it is one of the Distinctions of Persons of Condition, and well-bred People, to put bashful Bodies out of Countenance. Well, Sir <em>Simon</em>, said my Master, what say you now to my pretty Rustick?—He swore a great Oath, that he should better know what to say to me if he was as young as himself. Lady <em>Darnford</em> said, You will never leave, Sir <em>Simon</em>.</p>
			<p>Said my Master, You are a little confus’d, my good Girl, and out of Breath; but I have told all my kind Neighbours here a good deal of your Story, and your Excellence. Yes, said Lady <em>Darnford</em>, my dear Neighbour, as I will call you; we that are here present have all heard of your uncommon Story. Madam, said I, you have then heard what must make your kind Allowance for me very necessary. No, said Mrs. <em>Peters</em>, we have heard what will always make you valued as an Honour to our Sex, and as a worthy Pattern for all the young Ladies in the County. You are very good, Madam, said I, to make me able to look up, and be thankful for the Honour you are all pleas’d to do me.</p>
			<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> came in with the Canary, brought by <em>Nan</em>, to the Alcove, and some Cake on a Silver Salver; and I said, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, let me be your Assistant; I will serve the Ladies with the Cake. And so I took the Salver, and went round to the good Company with it, ending with my Master. The Lady <em>Jones</em> said, she never was serv’d with such a Grace, and it was giving me too much Trouble. O Madam, said I, I hope my good Master’s Favour will never make me forget that it is my Duty to wait upon his Friends.—<em>Master</em>, sweet one, said Sir <em>Simon</em>, I hope you won’t always call the ’Squire by that Name, for fear it should become a Fashion for all our Ladies to do the like thro’ the County. I, Sir, said I, shall have many Reasons to continue this Style, which cannot affect your good Ladies.</p>
			<p>Sir <em>Simon</em>, said Lady <em>Jones</em>, you are very arch upon us; but I see very well, that it will be the Interest of all the Gentlemen, to bring their Ladies into an Intimacy with one that can give them such a good Example. I am sure then, Madam, said I, it must be after I have been polish’d and improv’d by the Honour of such an Example as yours.</p>
			<p>They all were very good and affable, and the young Lady <em>Darnford</em>, who had wish’d to see me in this Dress, said, I beg your Pardon, dear Miss, as she call’d me; but I had heard how sweetly this Garb became you, and was told the History of it; and I begg’d it as a Favour that you might oblige us with your Appearance in it. I am much oblig’d to your Ladyship, said I, that your kind Prescription was so agreeable to my Choice. Why, said she, <em>was</em> it your Choice then?—I am glad of that: Tho’ I am sure your Person must <em>give</em> and not <em>take</em> Ornament from any Dress.</p>
			<p>You are very kind, Madam, said I: But there will be the less Reason to fear I should forget the high Obligations I shall have to the kindest of Gentlemen, when I can delight to shew the humble Degree from which his Goodness has rais’d me.—My dear <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, if you proceed at this Rate, I must insist upon your first Seven Days. You know what I mean. Sir, said I, you are all Goodness!</p>
			<p>They drank a Glass of Sack each, and Sir <em>Simon</em> would make me do so; saying, It is a Reflection, Madam, upon all the Ladies, if you don’t do as they do. No, Sir <em>Simon</em>, said I, that can’t be, because the Ladies Journey hither makes a Glass of Canary a proper Cordial for them. But I won’t refuse; because I will do myself the Honour of drinking good Health to you, and all this worthy Company.</p>
			<p>Said good Lady <em>Darnford</em>, to my Master, I hope, Sir, we shall have Mrs. <em>Andrews</em>’s Company at Table. He said, very obligingly, Madam, it is her Time now: and I will leave it to her Choice. If my good Ladies, then, will forgive me, Sir, said I, I had rather be excused. They all said, I must not be excused. I begg’d I might. Your Reason for it, my dear <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master? as the Ladies request it, I wish you would oblige them. Sir, reply’d I, your Goodness will make me, every Day, worthier of the Honour the Ladies do me; and when I can persuade myself that I am more worthy of it than at present, I shall with great Joy embrace all the Opportunities they will be pleased to give me.</p>
			<p>Mrs. <em>Peters</em> whisper’d Lady <em>Jones</em>, as my Master told me afterwards; Did you ever see such Excellence, such Prudence, and Discretion? Never in my Life, said the other good Lady. She will adorn, she was pleas’d to say, her Distinction. Ay, said Mrs. <em>Peters</em>, she would adorn any Station in Life.</p>
			<p>My good Master was highly delighted, generous Gentleman as he is! with the favourable Opinion of the Ladies; and I took the more Pleasure in it, because their Favour seem’d to lessen the Disgrace of his stooping so much beneath him.</p>
			<p>Lady <em>Darnford</em> said, We will not oppress you; tho’ we could almost blame your too punctilious Exactness; but if we excuse Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> at Dinner, we must insist upon her Company at the Card-table, and at a Dish of Tea: For we intend to pass the whole Day with you, Sir, as we told you. What say you to that, <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master? Sir, reply’d I, whatever you and the Ladies please, I will chearfully do. They said I was very obliging. But Sir <em>Simon</em> rapt out an Oath, and said, that <em>they</em> might dine together if they would; but <em>he</em> would dine with me, and nobody else. For, said he, I say, ’Squire, as Parson <em>Williams</em> said, (by which I found my Master had told them the Story) you must not think you have chosen one that nobody can like but yourself</p>
			<p>The young Ladies said, If I pleas’d, they would take a Turn about the Garden with me. I answer’d I would very gladly attend them; and so we three, and Lady <em>Jones</em>’s Sister-in-law, and Mr. <em>Peters</em>’s Niece, walk’d together. They were very affable, kind and obliging; and we soon enter’d into a good deal of Familiarity; and I found Miss <em>Darnford</em> a very agreeable Person. Her Sister was a little more on the Reserve; and I afterwards heard, that, about a Year before, she should fain have had my Master make his Addresses to her; but tho’ Sir <em>Simon</em> is reckon’d rich, she was not thought a sufficient Fortune for him. And now, to have him look down so low as me, must be a sort of Mortification to a poor young Lady!—and I pity’d her—Indeed I did!—I wish all young Persons of my Sex could be as happy as I am likely to be.</p>
			<p>My Master told me afterwards, that I left the other Ladies, and Sir <em>Simon</em> and Mr. <em>Peters</em>, full of my Praises; so that they could hardly talk of any thing else: one launching out upon my Complexion, another upon my Eyes, my Hand, and, in short, for you’ll think me sadly proud, upon my whole Person, and Behaviour; and they all magnify’d my Readiness and Obligingness in my Answers, and the like: And I was glad of it, as I said, for my good Master’s sake, who seem’d quite pleas’d and rejoic’d. God bless him, for his Goodness to me!</p>
			<p>Dinner not being ready, the young Ladies propos’d a Tune upon the Spinnet. I said, I believ’d it was not in Tune. They said, they knew it was but a few Months ago. If it is, said I, I wish I had known it; tho’ indeed, Ladies, added I, since you know my Story, I must own, that my Mind has not been long in Tune, to make use of it. So they would make me play upon it, and sing to it; which I did, a Song my dear good Lady had learn’d me, and us’d to be pleas’d with, and which she brought with her from <em>Bath</em>. And the Ladies were much taken with the Song, and were so kind as to approve my Performance: And Miss <em>Darnford</em> was pleas’d to compliment me, that I had all the Accomplishments of my Sex. I said, I had had a good Lady, in my Master’s Mother, who had spar’d no Pains nor Cost to improve me. She said, she wish’d the ’Squire could be prevail’d upon to give a Ball on an approaching happy Occasion, that we might have a Dancing-match, <em>&amp;c</em>.—But I can’t say I do; tho’ I did not say so; for these Occasions I think are too solemn for the <em>Principals</em>, at least of our Sex, to take Part in, especially if they have the same Thoughts of the Solemnity that I have: For indeed, tho’ I am in such an enviable Prospect of Happiness, I must own to you, my dear Parents, that I have something very awful upon my Mind, when I think of the Matter, and shall more and more, as it draws nearer and nearer. This is the Song.</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<h2 class="sub-heading">I.</h2>
					<p>Go, happy <strong class="clear">Paper</em>, gently steal,</p>
					<p>And underneath her Pillow lie;</p>
					<p>There, in <strong class="clear">soft Dreams</em>, my <strong class="small-cpas">Love</em> reveal,</p>
					<p>That <strong class="small-cpas">Love</em> which I must still conceal,</p>
					<p>And, wrapt in awful <strong class="clear">Silence</em>, die.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<h2 class="sub-heading">II.</h2>
					<p>Should <strong class="clear">Flames</em> be doom’d thy hapless Fate,</p>
					<p>To <strong class="clear">Atoms</em> <strong class="small-caps">Thou</em> would’st quickly turn</p>
					<p><strong class="small-caps">My</em> <strong class="clear">Pains</em> may bear a longer Date;</p>
					<p>For should I <strong class="clear">live</em>, and should she <strong class="clear">hate</em>,</p>
					<p>In <strong class="clear">endless</em> Torments I should <strong class="clear">burn</em>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<h2 class="sub-heading">III.</h2>
					<p>Tell fai <strong class="small-caps">Aurelia</em>, she has Charms,</p>
					<p>Might in a <strong class="clear">Hermit</em> stir Desire.</p>
					<p>T’ attain the Heav’n that’s in her Arms,</p>
					<p>I’d quit the <strong class="clear">World</em>’s alluring Harms,</p>
					<p>And to a <strong class="clear">Cell,</em> content, retire.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<h2 class="sub-heading">IV.</h2>
					<p>Of all that pleas’d my ravish’d Eye</p>
					<p>Her <strong class="clear">Beauty</em> should <strong class="clear">supply</em> the Place;</p>
					<p>Bold <strong class="clear">Raphael’s Strokes</em>, and <strong class="clear">Titian</em>’s <strong class="clear">Dye</em>,</p>
					<p>Should but in vain presume to vye</p>
					<p>With her inimitable <strong class="clear">Face</em>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<h2 class="sub-heading">V.</h2>
					<p>No more I’d wish for <strong class="clear">Phoebus’ Rays</em>,</p>
					<p>To gild the Object of my <strong class="clear">Sight</em>;</p>
					<p>Much less the <strong class="clear">Taper</em>’s fainter Blaze;</p>
					<p>Her <strong class="clear">Eyes</em> should measure out my <strong class="clear">Days</em>;</p>
					<p>And when she <strong class="clear">slept</em>, it should be <strong class="clear">Night</em>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p><em>About four o’Clock</em>. My Master just came up to me, and said, If you should see Mr. <em>Williams</em> below, do you think, <em>Pamela</em>, you should not be surpriz’d?—No, Sir, said I, I hope not. Why should I? Expect, said he, a Stranger then, when you come down to us in the Parlour; for the Ladies are preparing themselves for the Card-table, and they insist upon your Company—You have a mind, Sir, said I, I believe, to try all my Courage. Why, said he, does it want Courage to see him? No, Sir, said I, not at all. But I was grievously dash’d to see all those strange Ladies and Gentlemen; and now to see Mr. <em>Williams</em> before them, as some of them refus’d his Application for me, when I wanted to get away, it will a little shock me, to see them smile, in recollecting what has pass’d of that kind. Well, said he, guard your Heart against Surprizes, tho’ you shall see, when you come down, a Man that I can allow you to love dearly; tho’ hardly preferably to me.</p>
			<p>This surprizes me much. I am afraid he begins to be jealous of me. What will become of me, (for he look’d very seriously) if any Turn should happen now!—My Heart akes! I know not what’s the Matter. But I will go down as brisk as I can, that nothing may be imputed to me. Yet I wish this Mr. <em>Williams</em> had not been there now when they are all there; because of their Fleers at him and me. Otherwise I should be glad to see the poor Gentleman; for indeed I think him a good Man, and he has suffer’d for my sake.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>So, I am sent for down to Cards. I’ll go; but wish I may continue their good Opinions of me: For I shall be very awkward. My Master, by his serious Question, and bidding me guard my Heart against Surprizes, tho’ I should see, when I came down, a Man he can allow me to love dearly, tho’ hardly better than he, has quite alarm’d me, and made me sad!—I hope he loves me!—But whether he does or not, I am in for it now, over Head and Ears, I doubt, and can’t help loving him; ’tis a Folly to deny it. But to be sure I cannot love any Man preferably to him. I shall soon know what he means.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>Now, my dear Mother, must I write to you. Well might my good Master say so mysteriously as he did, about guarding my Heart against Surprizes. I never was so surpriz’d in my Life; and never could see a Man I lov’d so dearly!—O my dear Mother, it was my dear, dear Father, and not Mr. <em>Williams</em>, that was below ready to receive and to bless your Daughter; and both my Master and he enjoin me to write how the whole Matter was, and what my Thoughts were on this joyful Occasion.</p>
			<p>I will take the Matter from the Beginning, that God directed his Feet to this House, to this Time, as I have had it from Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, from my Master, my Father, the Ladies, and my own Heart and Conduct, as far as I know of both; because they command it, and you will be pleased with my Relation; and so, as you know how I came by the Connection, will make one uniform Relation of it.</p>
			<p>It seems then, that my dear Father and you were so uneasy to know the Truth of the Story that <em>Thomas</em> had told you, and fearing I was betrayed, and quite undone, that he got Leave of Absence, and set out the Day after <em>Thomas</em> was there; and so, on <em>Friday</em> Morning, he got to the neighbouring Town; and there he heard, that the Gentry in the Neighbourhood were at my Master’s, at a great Entertainment. He put on a clean Shirt and Neckcloth, that he brought in his Pocket, at an Alehouse there, and got shav’d; and so, after he had eat some Bread and Cheese, and drank a Can of Ale, he set out for my Master’s House, with a heavy Heart, dreading for me, and in much fear of being browbeaten. He had, it seems, asked, at the Alehouse, what Family the ’Squire had down here, in hopes to hear something of me; and they said, A Housekeeper, two Maids, and, at present, two Coachmen, and two Grooms, a Footman, and a Helper. Was that all? he said. They told him, There was a young Creature there, belike, who <em>was</em>, or <em>was to be</em>, his Mistress, or somewhat of that Nature; but had been his Mother’s Waiting-maid. This, he said, grieved his Heart, and made out what he fear’d.</p>
			<p>So he went on, and, about Three o’Clock in the Afternoon, came to the Gate; and ringing there, Sir <em>Simon</em>’s Coachman went to the Iron-gate; and he ask’d for the Housekeeper; tho’ from what I had wrote, in his Heart, he could not abide her. She sent for him in, little thinking who he was, and ask’d him, in the little Hall, what his Business with her was?—Only, Madam, said he, whether I cannot speak one Word with the ’Squire? No, Friend, said she; he is engaged with several Gentlemen and Ladies. Said he, I have Business with his Honour, of greater Consequence to me than either Life or Death; and Tears stood in his Eyes.</p>
			<p>At that she went into the great Parlour, where my Master was talking very pleasantly with the Ladies; and she said, Sir, here is a good tight old Man, that wants to see you on Business of Life and Death, he says, and is very earnest. Ay, said he, Who can that be!—Let him stay in the little Hall, and I’ll come to him presently. They all seem’d to stare; and Sir <em>Simon</em> said, No more nor less, I dare say, my good Friend, but a Bastard Child. If it is, said Lady <em>Jones</em>, bring it in to us. I will, said he.</p>
			<p><em>Mrs. Jewkes</em> tells me, my Master was much surpriz’d, when he saw who it was; and she much more, when my dear Father said,—Good God! give me Patience! but, as great as you are, Sir, I must ask for my Child! And burst out into Tears. O what Trouble have I given you both! My Master said, taking him by the Hand, Don’t be uneasy, Goodman <em>Andrews</em>, your Daughter is in the way to be happy!</p>
			<p>This alarm’d my dear Father, and he said, What! then is she dying? And trembled he could scarce stand. My Master made him sit down; and sat down by him, and said, No, God be praised! she is very well; and pray be comforted; I cannot bear to see you thus apprehensive; but she has wrote you a Letter to assure you, that she has Reason to be well satisfied and happy.</p>
			<p>Ah! Sir, said he, you told me once she was in <em>London</em>, waiting on a Bishop’s Lady, when all the time she was a severe Prisoner here.—Well, that’s all over now, Goodman <em>Andrews</em>, said my Master: but the Times are alter’d; for now the sweet Girl has taken me Prisoner; and, in a few Days, I shall put on the pleasantest Fetters that ever Man wore.</p>
			<p>O, Sir, said he, you are too pleasant for my Griefs. My Heart’s almost broke. But may I not see my poor Child? You shall presently, said he; for she is coming down to us; and since you won’t believe me, I hope you will her.</p>
			<p>I will ask you, good Sir, said he, but one Question till then, that I may know how to look upon her when I see her. Is she honest? Is she virtuous?—As the new-born Babe, Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, said my good Master; and, in twelve Days time, I hope, will be my Wife!—</p>
			<p>O flatter me not, good your Honour, said he: It cannot be! it cannot be!—I fear you have deluded her with strange Hopes; and would make me believe Impossibilities!—Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said he, do you tell my dear <em>Pamela</em>’s good Father, when I go out, all you know concerning me, and your Mistress that is to be. Mean time, make much of him, and set out what you have; and make him drink a Glass of what he likes best. If this be Wine, added he, fill me a Bumper.</p>
			<p>She did so; and he took my Father by the Hand, and said, Believe me, good Man, and be easy; for I can’t bear to see you tortur’d in this cruel Suspense: Your dear Daughter is the beloved of my Soul. I am glad you are come! For you’ll see us all in the same Story. And here’s your Dame’s Health; and God bless you both, for being the happy Means of procuring for me so great a Blessing! And so he drank a Bumper to this most obliging Health.</p>
			<p>What do I hear! it cannot surely be! said my Father. And your Honour is too good, I hope, to mock a poor old Man!—This ugly Story, Sir, of the Bishop, runs in my Head!—But you say, I shall see my dear Child!—And I shall see her honest!—If not, poor as I am, I would not own her!</p>
			<p>My Master bid Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> not let me know yet, that my Father was come, and went to the Company, and said, I have been agreeably surpriz’d. Here is honest old Goodman <em>Andrews</em> come full of Grief, to see his Daughter; for he fears she is seduced; and tells me, good honest Man, that, poor as he is, he will not own her, if she be not virtuous. O, said they all, with one Voice almost, dear Sir! shall we not see the good old Man you have so praised for his plain good Sense and honest Heart? If, said he, I thought <em>Pamela</em> would not be too much affected with the Surprize, I would make you all witness to their first Interview; for never did Daughter love a Father, or a Father a Daughter, as they two do one another. Miss <em>Darnford</em>, and all the Ladies, and the Gentlemen too, begg’d it might be so. But was not this very cruel, my dear Mother? For well might they think I should not support myself in such an agreeable Surprize.</p>
			<p>He said, kindly, I have but one Fear, that the dear Girl may be too much affected. O, said Lady <em>Darnford</em>, we’ll all help to keep up her Spirits. Says he, I’ll go up and prepare her; but won’t tell her of it. So he came up to me, as I have said, and amus’d me about Mr. <em>Williams</em>, to half prepare me for some Surprize; tho’ that could not have been any thing to this. And he left me, as I said, in that Suspense, at his mystical Words, saying, he would send to me, when they were going to Cards.</p>
			<p>My Master went from me to my Father, and asked if he had eaten any thing. No, said Mrs. <em>Jewkes;</em> the good Man’s Heart’s so full, he cannot eat, nor do any thing, till he has seen his dear Daughter. That shall soon be, said my Master. I will have you come in with me; for she is going to sit down with my Guests, to a Game at Quadrille; and I will send for her down. O, Sir, said my Father, don’t, don’t let me; I am not fit to appear before your Guests; let me see my Daughter by myself, I beseech you. Said he, They all know your honest Character, Goodman <em>Andrews</em>, and long to see you, for <em>Pamela</em>’s sake.</p>
			<p>So he took my Father by the Hand, and led him in, against his Will, to the Company. They were all very good. My Master kindly said, Ladies and Gentlemen, I present to you one of the honestest Men in <em>England;</em> my good <em>Pamela</em>’s Father. Mr. <em>Peters</em> went to him, and took him by the Hand, and said, We are all glad to see you, Sir; you are the happiest Man in the World in a Daughter, that we never saw before to Day; but cannot enough admire her.</p>
			<p>Said my Master, This Gentleman, Goodman <em>Andrews</em>, is the Minister of the Parish; but is not young enough for Mr. <em>Williams</em>. This cutting Joke, my poor Father said, made him fear, for a Moment, that all was a Jest.—Sir <em>Simon</em> also took him by the Hand, and said, Ay, you have a sweet Daughter, Honesty; we are all in Love with her. And the Ladies came, and said very fine things: Lady <em>Darnford</em> particularly, That he might think himself the happiest Man in <em>England</em>, in such a Daughter. If, and please you, Madam, said he, she be but vertuous, ’tis all in all: For all the rest is Accident. But, I doubt, his Honour has been too much upon the Joke with me. No, said Mrs. <em>Peters</em>, we are all Witness that he intends very honourably by her.—It is some Comfort, said he, and wiped his Eyes, that such good Ladies say so!—But I wish I could see her.</p>
			<p>They would have had him sit down by them, but he would only sit behind the Door, in the Corner of the Room, so that one could not soon see him, as one came in; because the Door open’d against him, and hid him almost. The Ladies all sat down; and my Master said, Desire Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> to step up; and tell Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> the Ladies wait for her. So down I came.</p>
			<p>Miss <em>Darnford</em> rose, and met me at the Door, and said, Well, Miss, we long’d for your Company. I did not see my dear Father; and, it seems, his Heart was too full to speak; and he got up, and sat down three or four times successively, unable to come to me, or to say any thing. The Ladies looked that way; but I would not, supposing it was Mr. <em>Williams</em>. And they made me sit down between Lady <em>Darnford</em> and Lady <em>Jones;</em> and asked me, what we should play at? I said, At what your Ladyships please. I wonder’d to see them smile, and look upon me, and to that Corner of the Room; but I was afraid of looking that way, for fear of seeing Mr. <em>Williams;</em> tho’ my Face was that way too, and the Table before me.</p>
			<p>Said my Master, Did you send your Letter away to the Post-house, my good Girl, for your Father? To be sure, Sir, said I, I did not forget that. I took the Liberty to desire Mr. <em>Thomas</em> to carry it. What, said he, I wonder, will the good old Couple say to it? O Sir, said I, your Goodness will be a Cordial to their dear honest Hearts! At that, my dear Father, not able to contain himself, nor yet to stir from the Place, gush’d out into a Flood of Tears, which he, good Soul! had been struggling with, it seems; and cry’d out, O my dear Child!</p>
			<p>I knew the Voice, and lifting up my Eyes, and seeing my Father, gave a Spring, overturn’d the Table, without Regard to the Company, and threw myself at his Feet, O my Father! my Father! said I, can it be!—Is it you? Yes, it is! It is! O bless your happy—Daughter! I would have said, and down I sunk.</p>
			<p>My Master, seem’d concern’d.—I fear’d, said he, that the Surprize would be too much for her Spirits; and all the Ladies run to me, and made me drink a Glass of Water; and I found myself incircled in the Arms of my dearest Father.—O tell me, said I, every thing! How long have you been here? When did you come? How does my honour’d Mother? and half a dozen Questions more, before he could answer one.</p>
			<p>They permitted me to retire, with my Father; and then I pour’d forth all my Vows, and Thanksgivings to God for this additional Blessing; and confirm’d all my Master’s Goodness to his scarce-believing Amazement. And we kneeled together, blessing God, and blessing one another, for several ecstatick Minutes; and my Master coming in soon after, my dear Father said, O Sir, what a Change is this! May God reward you! may God bless you in this World and the next!</p>
			<p>May God bless us all! said he. But how does my sweet Girl! I have been in Pain for you!—I am sorry I did not apprize you before hand.</p>
			<p>O Sir, said I, it was You! and all you do must be good.—But this was a Blessing so unexpected!</p>
			<p>Well, said he, you have given Pain to all the Company. They will be glad to see you, when you can; for you have spoiled all their Diversion: And yet painfully delighted them at the same time. Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, said he, you make this House your own; and the longer you stay, the more welcome you’ll be. After you have a little compos’d yourself, my dear Girl, step in to us again. I am glad to see you so well so soon. And so he left us.</p>
			<p>See you, my dear Father, said I, what Goodness there is in this once naughty Master! O pray for him! and pray for me, that I may deserve it!</p>
			<p>How long has this happy Change been wrought, said he, my dear Child!—O, said I, several happy Days!—I have wrote down every thing; and you’ll see, from the Depth of Misery, what God has done for your happy Daughter!</p>
			<p>Blessed be his Name! said he. But do you say he will marry you! Can it be, that such a brave Gentleman will make a Lady of the Child of such a poor Man as I? O the Goodness of God! How will your poor dear Mother be able to support these happy Tidings? I will set out to-morrow, to acquaint her with it. For I am but half happy till the dear good Woman shares it with me!—To be sure, my dear Child, we ought to go into some far Country, to hide ourselves, that we may not disgrace you by our Poverty!</p>
			<p>O my dear Father, said I, now you are unkind for the first Time. Your Poverty has been my Glory, and my Riches; and I have nothing to brag of, but that I ever thought it an Honour to me, rather than a Disgrace; because you were always so honest, that your Child might well boast of such a Parentage!</p>
			<p>In this manner, my dear Mother, did we pass the happy Moments, till Miss <em>Darnford</em> came to me, and said, How do you do, dear Miss? I rejoice to see you well! Pray let us have your Company. And, said she, taking my Father’s Hand, and yours too, good Mr. <em>Andrews</em>.</p>
			<p>This was very obliging, I told her; and we went to the great Parlour; and my Master took my Father by the Hand, and made him sit down by him, and drink a Glass of Wine with him. Mean time, I made my Excuses to the Ladies, as well as I could; which they readily granted me. But Sir <em>Simon</em>, after his comical manner, put his Hands on my Shoulders, Let me see, let me see, said he, where your Wings grow; for I never saw any body fly like you?—Why, said he, you have broke Lady <em>Jones</em>’s Shins with the Table. Shew her else, Madam.</p>
			<p>His Pleasantry made them laugh. And I said, I was very sorry for my Extravagancy: And if it had not been my Master’s Doings, I should have said, it was a Fault to permit me to be so surprized, and put out of myself, before such good Company. They said, All was very excusable; and they were glad I suffer’d no more by it. They were so kind, as to excuse me at Cards, and play’d by themselves; and I went, by my Master’s Command, and sat on the other Side, in the happiest Place I ever was blest with, between two of the dearest Men in the World to me, and each holding one of my Hands;—my Father, every now-and-then, with Tears in his Eyes, blessing God, and saying, Could I ever have hoped this!</p>
			<p>I asked him, if he had been so kind as to bring the Papers with him? He said he had, and looked at me, as who should say, Must I give them to you now?—I said, Be pleased to let me have them. He pulled them from his Pocket; and I stood up, and, with my best Duty, gave them into my Master’s Hands. He said, Thank you, <em>Pamela</em>. Your Father shall take all with him, to see what a sad Fellow I have been, as well as the present happier Alteration. But I must have them all again, for the Writer’s sake.</p>
			<p>The Ladies and Gentlemen would make me govern the Tea-table, whatever I could do; and <em>Abraham</em> attended me, to serve the Company. My Master and my Father sat together, and drank a Glass or two of Wine instead of Tea; and Sir <em>Simon</em> jok’d with my Master, and said, I warrant you would not be such a Woman’s Man, as to drink Tea, for ever so much, with the Ladies. But your Time’s coming, and, I doubt not, you’ll be made as conformable as I.</p>
			<p>My Master was very urgent with them to stay Supper; and, at last, they comply’d, on Condition that I would grace the Table, as they were pleased to call it. I begg’d to be excus’d. My Master said, Don’t be excus’d, <em>Pamela</em>, since the Ladies desire it. And besides, said he, we won’t part with your Father; and so you may as well stay with us.</p>
			<p>I was in hope my Father and I might sup by ourselves, or only with Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>. And Miss <em>Darnford</em>, who is a most obliging young Lady, said, We will not part with you; indeed we won’t.</p>
			<p>When Supper was brought in, Lady <em>Darnford</em> took me by the Hand, and said to my Master, Sir, by your Leave; and would have plac’d me at the Upper-end of the Table. Pray, pray, Madam, said I, excuse me, I cannot do it, indeed I cannot. <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, to the great Delight of my good Father, as I could see by his Looks, Oblige Lady <em>Darnford</em>, since she desires it. It is but a little before your Time, you know.</p>
			<p>Dear, good Sir, said I, pray don’t command it! Let me sit by my Father, pray! Why, said Sir <em>Simon</em>, here’s ado indeed; Sit down at the Upper-end, as you should do! and your Father shall sit by you there. This put my dear Father upon Difficulties. And my Master said, Come, I’ll place you all: And so put Lady <em>Darnford</em> at the Upper-end, Lady <em>Jones</em> at her Right-hand, and Mrs. <em>Peters</em> on the other; and he placed me between the two young Ladies; but very genteely put Miss <em>Darnford</em> below her younger Sister; saying, Come, Miss, I put you here, because you shall hedge in this little Cuckow; for I take notice, with Pleasure, of your Goodness to her; and besides, all you very young Ladies should sit together. This seem’d to please both Sisters; for had the youngest Miss been put there, it might have piqu’d her, as matters had been formerly, to be placed below me; whereas Miss <em>Darnford</em> giving Place to her younger Sister, made it less odd she should to me; especially with that handsome Turn of the dear Man, as if I was a Cuckow, and to be hedg’d in.</p>
			<p>My Master kindly said, Come, Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, you and I will sit together. And so took his Place at the Bottom of the Table, and set my Father on his Right-hand; and Sir <em>Simon</em> would sit on his Left. For, said he, Parson, I think the Petticoats should sit together; and so do you sit down by that Lady (his Sister). A boiled Turkey standing by me, my Master said, Cut up that Turkey, <em>Pamela</em>, if it be not too strong Work for you, that Lady <em>Darnford</em> may not have too much Trouble. So I carv’d it in a Trice, and helped the Ladies. Miss <em>Darnford</em> said, I would give something to be so dextrous a Carver. O Miss, said I, my late good Lady would always make me do these things, when she entertained her Female Friends; as she used to do on particular Days.</p>
			<p>Ay, said my Master, I remember my poor Mother would often say, if I, or any body at Table, happen’d to be a little out in Carving, I’ll send up for my <em>Pamela</em>, to shew you how to carve. Said Lady <em>Jones</em>, Mrs. <em>Andrews</em> has every Accomplishment of her Sex. She is quite wonderful for her Years. Miss <em>Darnford</em> said, And I can tell you, Madam, that she plays sweetly upon the Spinnet, and sings as sweetly to it; for she has a fine Voice. Foolish, said Sir <em>Simon</em>, who, that hears her speak, knows not that? and who, that sees her Fingers, believes not that they were made to touch any Key? O, Parson! said he, ’tis well you’re by, or I should have had a Blush from the Ladies. I hope not, Sir <em>Simon</em>, said Lady <em>Jones;</em> for a Gentleman of your Politeness, would not say any thing that would make Ladies blush.—No, no, said he, for the World: But if I had, it would have been as the Poet says,</p>
			<div class="blockquote poem">
				<div class="stanza-itlalics">
					<p>They blush, because they understand.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>When the Company went away, Lady <em>Darnford</em>, Lady <em>Jones</em>, and Mrs. <em>Peters</em>, severally invited my Master, and me with him, to their Houses; and begg’d he would permit me, at least, to come before we left these Parts. And they said, We hope, when the happy Knot is ty’d, you will induce the ’Squire to reside more among us. We were always glad, said Lady <em>Darnford</em>, when he was here; but now shall have double Reason. O what grateful things were these to the Ears of my good Father!</p>
			<p>When the Company was gone, my Master ask’d my Father, if he smoak’d; he said, No. He made us both sit down by him; and he said, I have been telling this sweet Girl, that, in Fourteen Days, and two of them are gone, she must fix on one, to make me happy: And have left it to her to chuse either one of the first or the last Seven. My Father held up his Hands and Eyes; God bless your Honour, said he, is all I can say! Now, <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, taking my Hand, don’t let a little wrong-timed Bashfulness take place, without any other Reason, because I should be glad to go to <em>Bedfordshire</em> as soon as I could; and I would not return till I carry my Servants there a Mistress, who should assist me to repair the Mischiefs she has made in it.</p>
			<p>I could not look up for Confusion. And my Father said, My dear Child, I need not, I am sure, prompt your Obedience in whatever will most oblige so good a Master. What says my <em>Pamela?</em> said my Master. She does not use to be at a Loss for Expression. Sir, said I, were I too sudden, it would look as if I doubted whether you would hold in your Mind, and was not willing to give you Time for Reflection. But otherwise, to be sure, I ought to resign myself implicitly to your Will.</p>
			<p>Said he, I want not Time for Reflection. For I have often told you, and that long ago, I could not live without you. And my Pride of Condition made me both tempt and terrify you to other Terms; but your Virtue was Proof against all Temptation, and was not to be aw’d by Terrors: Wherefore, as I could not conquer my Passion for you, I corrected myself, and resolved, since you would not be mine upon my Terms, you should upon your own: And now I desire you not on any other, I assure you. And, I think, the sooner it is done, the better. What say you, Mr. <em>Andrews?</em> Sir, said he, there is so much Goodness of your Side, and, blessed be God! so much Prudence of my Daughter’s, that I must be quite silent. But when it is done, I and my poor Wife, shall have nothing to do, but to pray for you both, and to look back with Wonder and Joy, on the Ways of Providence.</p>
			<p>This, said my Master, is <em>Friday</em> Night; and suppose, my Girl, it be next <em>Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday</em>, or <em>Thursday</em> Morning?—Say, my <em>Pamela</em>.</p>
			<p>Will you, Sir, said I, excuse me till to-morrow for an Answer?—I will, said he. And he touch’d the Bell, and called for Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>. Where, said he, does Mr. <em>Andrews</em> lie to-night? You’ll take care of him: He’s a very good Man; and will bring a Blessing upon every House he sets his Foot in.</p>
			<p>My dear Father wept for Joy; and I could not refrain keeping him Company. And my Master saluting me, bid us Good-night, and retir’d. And I waited upon my dear Father, and was so full of Prattle, of my Master’s Goodness, and my future Prospects, that I believed afterwards I was turned all into Tongue. But he indulged me, and was transported with Joy; and went to-bed, and dreamt of nothing but <em>Jacob</em>’s Ladder, and Angels ascending and descending, to bless him, and his Daughter.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="section">
			<h2 class="sub-heading"><em>Saturday</em>.</h2>
			<p class="first">I Rose up early in the Morning; but found my Father was up before me, and was gone to walk in the Garden. I went to him: And with what Delight, with what Thankfulness, did we go over every Scene of it, that had before been so dreadful to me! The Fish-Pond, the Back-door, and every Place: O what Reason had we for Thankfulness and Gratitude!</p>
			<p>About Seven o’Clock, my good Master join’d us, in his Morning-gown and Slippers; and looking a little heavy, I said, Sir, I fear you had not good Rest last Night. That is your Fault, <em>Pamela</em>, said he: After I went from you, I must needs look into your Papers, and could not leave them till I had read them thro’; and so ’twas Three o’Clock before I went to sleep. I wish, Sir, said I, you had had better Entertainment. The worst Part of it, said he, was what I had brought upon myself; and you have not spar’d me. Sir, said I—He interrupting me, said, Well, I forgive you. You had too much Reason for it. But I find, plain enough, that if you had got away, you would soon have been <em>Williams</em>’s Wife: And I can’t see how it could well have been otherwise. Indeed, Sir, said I, I had no Notion of it, or of being any body’s. I believe so, said he; but it must have come on as a Thing of Course; and I see your Father was for it. Sir, said he, I little thought of the Honour your Goodness would confer upon her; and I thought that would be a Match above what we could do for her, a great deal. But when I found she was not for it, I resolved not to urge her; but leave all to God’s Grace, and her own Prudence.</p>
			<p>I see, said he, all was sincere, honest, and open; and I speak of it, if it had been done, as a thing that could hardly well be avoided; and I am quite satisfied. But, said he, I must observe, as I have an hundred times, with Admiration, what a prodigious Memory, and easy and happy Manner of Narration this excellent Girl has! And tho’ she is full of her pretty Tricks and Artifices, to escape the Snares I had laid for her, yet all is innocent, lovely, and uniformly beautiful. You are exceedingly happy in a Daughter; and, I hope, I shall be so in a Wife.—Or, said my Father, may she not have that Honour!—I fear it not, said he; and hope I shall deserve it of her.</p>
			<p>But, <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, I am sorry to find, in some Parts of your Journal, that <em>Mrs. Jewkes</em> carry’d her Orders a little too far. And I the more take Notice of it, because you have not complain’d to me of her Behaviour, as she might have expected for some Parts of it. Tho’ a good deal was occasion’d by my strict Orders.—But she had the Insolence to strike my Girl! I find. Sir, said I, I was a little provoking, I believe; but as we forgave one another, I was the less intitled to complain of her.</p>
			<p>Well, said he, you are very good; but if you have any particular Resentment, I will indulge it so far, as that she shall hereafter have nothing to do where you are. Sir, said I, you are so kind, that I ought to forgive every body; and when I see that God has brought about my Happiness by the very Means that I thought then my great Grievance; I ought to bless those Means, and forgive all that was disagreeable to me at the time, for the great Good that has issued from it.—That, said he, and kissed me, is sweetly consider’d! and it shall be my Part to make you Amends for what you have suffer’d, that you may still think lighter of the one, and have Cause to rejoice in the other.</p>
			<p>My dear Father’s Heart was full; and he said, with his Hands folded, and lifted up, Pray, Sir, let me go,—let me go,—to my dear Wife! and tell her all these blessed things, while my Heart holds! for it is ready to burst with Joy! Good Man! said my Master,—I love to hear this honest Heart of yours speaking at your Lips. I injoin you, <em>Pamela</em>, to continue your Relation, as you have Opportunity; and tho’ your Father be here, write to your Mother, that this wondrous Story be perfect, and we, your Friends, may read and admire you more and more. Ay, pray, pray do, my dear Child, said my Father. And this is the Reason that I write on, my dear Mother, when I thought not to do it, because my Father could tell you all that passed while he was here.</p>
			<p>My Master took notice of my Psalm, and was pleas’d to commend it; and said, That I had very charitably turn’d the last Verses, which, in the Original, was full of heavy Curses, to a Wish, that shew’d I was not of an implacable Disposition; tho’ my then Usage might have excused it, if I had. But, said he, I think you shall sing it to me tomorrow.</p>
			<p>After we have breakfasted, added he, if you have no Objection, <em>Pamela</em>, we’ll take an Airing together; and it shall be in the Coach, because we’ll have your Father’s Company. He would have excus’d himself; but my Master would have it so. But he was much ashamed, because he was not in a Dress for my Master’s Company.</p>
			<p>My Master would make us both breakfast with him, on Chocolate; and he said, I would have you, <em>Pamela</em>, begin to dress as you used to do; for now, at least, you may call your <em>two other Bundles</em> your own; and if you want any thing against the approaching Occasion, private, as I design it, I’ll send to <em>Lincoln</em> for it, by a special Messenger. I said, My good Lady’s Bounty, and his own, had set me much above my Degree, and I had very good things of all Sorts; and I did not desire any other, because I would not excite the Censure of the Ladies. That would be a different thing, he was pleased to say, when he publickly own’d his Nuptials, after we came to the other House. But at present, if I was satisfied, he would not make Words with me.</p>
			<p>I hope, Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, said he to my Father, you’ll not leave us till you see the Affair over, and then you’ll be <em>sure</em> I mean honourably; and besides, <em>Pamela</em> will be induced to set the Day sooner. O Sir, said he, I bless God, I have no Reason to doubt your meaning honourably; and I hope you’ll excuse me, if I set out on <em>Monday</em> Morning, very early, to my dear Wife, and make her as happy as I am.</p>
			<p>Why, <em>Pamela</em>, said my good Master, may it not be perform’d on <em>Tuesday</em>, and then your Father, may-be, will stay?—I should have been glad to have had it to-morrow, added he; but I have sent Monsieur <em>Colbrand</em> for a Licence, that you may have no Scruple unanswer’d; and he can’t very well be back before to-morrow Night, or <em>Monday</em> Morning.</p>
			<p>This was most agreeable News. I said, Sir, I know my dear Father will want to be at home. And as you was so good to give me a Fortnight from last <em>Thursday</em>, I should be glad you’ll be pleased to indulge me with some Day in the second Seven. Well, said he, I will not be too urgent; but the sooner you fix, the better. Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, we must leave something to these <em>Jephtha</em>’s Daughters in these Cases, he was pleased to say: I suppose the little bashful Folly, which, in the happiest Circumstances, may give a kind of Regret to quit the Maiden State, and an Aukwardness at the Entrance of a new one, is a Reason with <em>Pamela;</em> and so she shall name her Day. Sir, said he, you are all Goodness.</p>
			<p>I went up soon after, and new dress’d myself, taking Possession, in a happy Moment, I hope, of my <em>two Bundles</em>, as my good Master was pleased to call them, (alluding to my former Division of those good things my Lady and himself bestow’d upon me) and so put on fine Linen, silk Shoes, and fine white Cotton Stockens, a fine quilted Coat, a delicate green mantua silk Gown and Coat; a <em>French</em> Necklace, and a lac’d Head, and Handkerchief, and clean Gloves; and taking my Fan in my Hand, I, like a little proud Hussy, looked in the Glass, and thought myself a Gentlewoman once more; but I forgot not to thank God, for being able to put on this Dress with so much Comfort.</p>
			<p>Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> would help to dress me, and complimented me highly, saying, among other things, that now I looked like her Lady indeed! And as, she said, the little Chapel was ready, and Divine Service would be read in it to-morrow, she wished the happy Knot might then be ty’d. Said she, Have you not seen the Chapel, Madam, since it has been cleaned out?—No, said I; but are we to have Service in it to-morrow, do you say?—I am glad of that; for I have been a sad Heathen lately, sore against my Will!—But who is to officiate?—Somebody, reply’d she, Mr. <em>Peters</em> will send. You tell me very good News, said I, Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>. I hope it will never be a Lumber-room again.—Ay, said she, I can tell you more good News; for the two Miss <em>Darnford</em>’s, and Lady <em>Jones</em>, are to be here at the Opening of it; and will stay and dine with you. My Master, said I, has not told me that. You must alter your Stile, Madam, said she. It must not be <em>Master</em>, now, sure!—O, return’d I, that is a Language I shall never forget. He shall always be my Master; and I shall think myself more and more his Servant.</p>
			<p>My poor Father did not know I went up to dress myself; and he said, his Heart misgave him, when he saw me first, for fear I was made a Fool of, and that here was some fine Lady that was to be my Master’s true Wife. And he stood in Admiration, and said, O, my dear Child, how well will you become your happy Condition! Why you look like a Lady already!—I hope, my dear Father, said I, and boldly kissed him, I shall always be your dutiful Daughter, whatever my Condition be.</p>
			<p>My Master sent me word he was ready; and when he saw me, said, Dress as you will, <em>Pamela</em>, you’re a charming Girl; and so handed me to the Coach, and would make my Father and me sit both on the Fore-side; and sat backwards, over-against me; and bid the Coachman drive to the Meadow; that is, where he once met Mr. <em>Williams</em>.</p>
			<p>The Conversation was most agreeable to me, and to my dear Father, as we went; and he more and more exceeded in Goodness and Generosity; and, while I was gone up to dress, he had presented my Father with twenty Guineas; desiring him to buy himself and my Mother such Apparel, as they should think proper; and lay it all out: But I knew not this till after that we came home; my Father having no Opportunity to tell me of it.</p>
			<p>He was pleased to tell me of the Chapel being got in tolerable Order; and said, it look’d very well; and against he came down next, it should be all new white-wash’d, and painted, and lin’d; and a new Pulpit-cloth, Cushion, Desk, &amp;<em>c</em>. and that it should always be kept in order for the future. He told me, the two Miss <em>Darnford</em>’s, and Lady <em>Jones</em>, would dine with him on <em>Sunday;</em> And with their Servants and mine, said he, we shall make a tolerable little Congregation. And, added he, have I not well contriv’d, to shew you, that the Chapel is really a little House of God, and has been consecrated, before we solemnize our Nuptials in it?—O, Sir, reply’d I, your Goodness to me is inexpressible! Mr. <em>Peters</em>, said he, offer’d to come and officiate in it; but would not stay to dine with me, because he has Company at his own House; and so I intend that Divine Service shall be perform’d in it, by one to whom I shall make some yearly Allowance, as a sort of Chaplain.—You look serious, <em>Pamela</em>, added he; I know you think of your Friend <em>Williams</em>. Indeed, Sir, said I, if you won’t be angry, I did. Poor Man! I am sorry I have been the Cause of his disobliging you.</p>
			<p>When we came to the Meadow, where the Gentry have their Walk sometimes, the Coach stopt, and my Master alighted, and led me to the Brook-side; and it is a very pretty Summer Walk. He asked my Father, if he chose to walk out, or go on in the Coach, to the further End. He, poor Man, chose to go in the Coach, for fear, he said, any Gentry should be walking there; and he told me, he was most of the way upon his Knees, in the Coach, thanking God for his gracious Mercies and Goodness; and begging a Blessing upon my good Master and me.</p>
			<p>I was quite astonish’d, when we came into the shady Walk, to see Mr. <em>Williams</em> there. See there, said my Master, there’s poor <em>Williams</em>, taking his solitary Walk again, with his Book. And it seems, it was so contriv’d; for Mr. <em>Peters</em> had been, as I since find, desir’d to tell him, to be in that Walk at such an Hour in the Morning.</p>
			<p>So, old Acquaintance, said my Master, again have I met you in this Place? What Book are you now reading? He said, It was <em>Boileau’s Lutrin.</em> Said my Master, You see I have brought with me my little Fugitive, that would have been: While you are perfecting yourself in <em>French</em>, I am trying to learn <em>English;</em> and hope soon to be Master of it.</p>
			<p>Mine, Sir, said he, is a very beautiful Piece of <em>French</em>: But your <em>English</em> has no Equal.</p>
			<p>You are very polite, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, said my Master. And he that does not think as you do, deserves no Share in her. Why, <em>Pamela</em>, added he, very generously, why so strange, where you have once been so familiar? I do assure you both, that I mean not, by this Interview, to insult Mr. <em>Williams</em>, or confuse you. Then I said, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, I am very glad to see you well; and tho’ the generous Favour of my good Master has happily changed the Scene, since you and I last saw one another, I am nevertheless very glad of an Opportunity to acknowledge, with Gratitude, your good Intentions, not so much to serve me, as <em>me</em>, but as a Person that then had great Reason to believe herself in Distress. And, I hope, Sir, added I, to my Master, your Goodness will permit me to say this.</p>
			<p>You, <em>Pamela</em>, said he, may make what Acknowledgments you please to Mr. <em>Williams</em>’s good Intentions; and I would have you speak as you think; but I do not apprehend myself to be quite so much oblig’d to those Intentions.</p>
			<p>Sir, said Mr. <em>Williams</em>, I beg leave to say, I knew well, that, by Education, you was no Libertine; nor had I Reason to think you so by Inclination; and when you came to reflect, I hoped you would not be displeased with me. And this was no small Motive to me, at first, to do as I did.</p>
			<p>Ay, but, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, said my Master, could you think, that I should have had Reason to thank you, if, above all her Sex, I loved one Person, and you had robbed me of her, and marry’d her yourself?—And then, said he, you are to consider, that she was of long Acquaintance with me, and a quite new one to you; that I had sent her down to my own House, for better securing her; and that you, who had Access to my House, could not effect your Purpose, without being guilty, in some sort, of a Breach of the Laws of Hospitality and Friendship. As to my Designs upon her, I own they had not the best Appearance; but still I was not answerable to Mr. <em>Williams</em> on that Score; much less could you be excus’d, to invade a Property so very dear to me, and to endeavour to gain an Interest in her Affections, tho’ you could not be certain, that Matters would not turn out as they have actually done.</p>
			<p>I own, said he, that some Parts of my Conduct seem exceptionable, as you state it. But, Sir, I am but a young Man. I meant no Harm. I had no Interest, I am sure, to incur your Displeasure; and when you think of every thing, and the inimitable Graces of Person, and Perfections of Mind, that adorn this excellent Lady, (so he called me) you will, perhaps, find your Generosity allow something as an Extenuation of a Fault, which your Anger would not permit as an Excuse.</p>
			<p>I have done, said my Master; nor did I meet you here to be angry with you. <em>Pamela</em> knew not that she should see you; and now you are both present, I would ask you, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, If, now you know my honourable Designs towards this good Girl, you can really be <em>almost</em>, I will not say <em>quite</em>, as well pleased with the Friendship of my Wife, as you could be with the Favour of Mrs. <em>Andrews?</em></p>
			<p>Sir, said he, I will answer you truly. I think I could have preferr’d, with her, any Condition that could have befallen me, had I consider’d only <em>myself</em>. But, Sir, I was very far from having any Encouragement to expect her <em>Favour</em>, and I had much more Reason to believe, that if she could have hoped for your Goodness, her Heart was too much pre-engaged, to think of any body else. And give me Leave further to say, Sir, That tho’ I tell you sincerely my Thoughts, were I only to consider <em>myself</em>, yet when I consider <em>her Good</em>, and <em>her Merit</em>, I should be highly ungenerous, were it put to my <em>Choice</em>, if I could not wish her in a Condition so much superior to what I could do for her, and so very answerable to her Merit.</p>
			<p><em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, <em>you</em> are obliged to Mr. <em>Williams</em>, and ought to thank him: He has distinguished well. But as for <em>me</em>, who had like to have lost you by his means, I am glad the Matter was not left to his <em>Choice</em>. Mr. <em>Williams</em>, said he, I give you <em>Pamela</em>’s Hand, because I know it will be pleasing to her, in Token of her Friendship and Esteem for you; and I give you mine, that I will not be your Enemy. But yet I must say, that I think I owe this proper Manner of your Thinking more to your Disappointment, than to the Generosity you talk of.</p>
			<p>Mr. <em>Williams</em> kissed my Hand, as my Master gave it him; and my Master said, Sir, you will go home and dine with me, and I’ll shew you my little Chapel; and do you, <em>Pamela</em>, look upon yourself at Liberty to number Mr. <em>Williams</em> in the List of your Friends.</p>
			<p>How generous, how noble was this! Mr. <em>Williams</em> (and so had I) had Tears of Pleasure in his Eyes. I was silent; but Mr. <em>Williams</em> said, Sir, I shall be taught, by your Generosity, to think myself inexcusably wrong, in every Step I took, that could give you Offence; and my future Life shall shew my respectful Gratitude.</p>
			<p>We walked on till we came to the Coach, where was my dear Father. <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master, tell Mr. <em>Williams</em> who that good Man is. O, Mr. <em>Williams!</em> said I, it is my dear Father; And, my Master was pleased to say, one of the honestest Men in <em>England. Pamela</em> owes every thing that she is to be, as well as her Being, to him; for, I think, she would not have brought me to this, nor made so great Resistance, but for the good Lessons, and religious Education she imbib’d from him.</p>
			<p>Mr. <em>Williams</em> said, taking my Father’s Hand, You see, good Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, with inexpressible Pleasure, the Fruits of your pious Care; and now are in a way, with your beloved Daughter, to reap the happy Effects of it.—I am overcome, said my dear Father, with his Honour’s Goodness. But I can only say, I bless <em>God</em>, and bless <em>him</em>.</p>
			<p>Mr. <em>Williams</em> and I being nearer the Coach than my Master; and he offering to draw back, to give way to him, he kindly said, Pray, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, oblige <em>Pamela</em> with your Hand; and step in yourself. He bow’d, and took my Hand, and my Master made him step in, and sit next me, all that ever he could do, and sat himself over-against him, next my Father, who sat against me.</p>
			<p>And he said, Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, I told you Yesterday, that the Divine you saw, was <em>not</em> Mr. <em>Williams;</em> I now tell you, this Gentleman <em>is</em>: And tho’ I have been telling him, I think not <em>myself</em> obliged to his Intentions; yet I will own, that <em>Pamela</em> and <em>you</em> are; and tho’ I won’t promise to love him, I would have you.</p>
			<p>Sir, said Mr. <em>Williams</em>, you have a way of overcoming, that hardly all my Reading affords an Instance of the like; and it is the more noble, as it is on this Side, as I presume, the happy Ceremony; which, great as your Fortune is, will lay you under an Obligation to so much Virtue and Beauty, when she becomes yours; for you will then have a Treasure that Princes might envy.</p>
			<p>Said my generous Master, (God bless him!) Mr. <em>Williams</em>, it is impossible that you and I should long live at Variance, when our Sentiments agree so well together, on Subjects the most material.</p>
			<p>I was quite confused; and my Master seeing it, took my Hand, and said, Look up, my good Girl! and collect yourself—Don’t injure Mr. <em>Williams</em> and me so much, as to think we are capping Compliments, as we used to do Verses, at School. I dare answer for us both, that we say not a Syllable we don’t think.</p>
			<p>O, Sir, said I, how unequal am I to all this Goodness! Every Moment that passes, adds to the Weight of the Obligations you oppress me with.</p>
			<p>Think not too much of that, said he, most generously Mr. <em>Williams</em>’s Compliments to you have great Advantage of mine: For, tho’ equally sincere, I have a great deal to say, and to do, to compensate the Sufferings I have made you undergo; and, at last, must sit down, dissatisfied, because those will never be aton’d by all I can do for you.</p>
			<p>He saw my dear Father quite unable to support these affecting Instances of his Goodness; and he let go my Hand, and took his, and said, seeing his Tears, I wonder not, my dear <em>Pamela</em>’s Father, that your honest Heart springs thus to your Eyes, to see all her Trials at an End. I will not pretend to say, that I had formerly either Power or Will to act thus. But since I began to resolve on the Change you see, I have reap’d so much Pleasure in it, that my own <em>Interest</em> will keep me steady. For, till within these few Days, I knew not what it was to be happy.</p>
			<p>Poor Mr. <em>Williams</em>, with Tears of Joy in his Eyes, said; How happily, Sir, have you been touched by the Divine Grace, before you have been hurried into the Commission of Sins, that the deepest Penitence could hardly have aton’d for!—God has enabled you to stop short of the Evil; and you have nothing to do, but to rejoice in the Good, which now will be doubly so, because you can receive it without the least inward Reproach.</p>
			<p>You do well, said he, to remind me, that I owe all this to the Grace of God. I bless Him for it; and I thank this good Man for his excellent Lessons. I thank his dear Daughter for following them: And, I hope, from <em>her</em> good Example, and <em>your</em> Friendship, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, in time, to be half as good as my Tutoress. And that, said he, I believe you’ll own, will make me, without Disparagement to any Gentleman, the best Fox-hunter in <em>England</em>.—Mr. <em>Williams</em> was going to speak: And he said, You put on so grave a Look, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, that, I believe, what I have said, with you practical good Folks, is liable to Exception: But I see we were become quite grave; and we must not be too serious neither.</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>What a happy Creature, my dear Mother, is your <em>Pamela!</em>—O may my thankful Heart, and the good Use I may be enabled to make of the Blessings before me, be a Means to continue this delightful Prospect to a long Date, for the sake of the dear good Gentleman, who thus becomes the happy Instrument, in the Hands of Providence, to bless all he smiles upon! To be sure, I shall never enough acknowledge the Value he is pleased to express for my Unworthiness, in that he has prevented my Wishes, and, unask’d, sought the Occasion of being reconciled to a good Man, who, for my sake, had incurred his Displeasure; and whose Name he could not, a few Days before, permit to pass thro’ my Lips: But see the wonderful Ways of Providence! The very things that I most dreaded his seeing or knowing, the Contents of my Papers, have, as I hope, satisfy’d all his Scruples, and been a Means to promote my Happiness.</p>
			<p>Henceforth let not us poor short-sighted Mortals pretend to rely on our own Wisdom; or vainly think, that we are absolutely to direct for ourselves. I have abundant Reason, I am sure, to say, that when I was most disappointed, I was nearer my Happiness. For, had I made my Escape, which was so often my chief Point of View, and what I had placed my Heart upon, I had escaped the Blessings now before me, and fallen, perhaps headlong, into the Miseries I would have avoided! And yet, after all, it was necessary I should take the Steps I did, to bring on this wonderful Turn! O the unsearchable Wisdom of God!—And how much ought I to adore the Divine Goodness, and humble myself, who am made a poor Instrument, as, I hope, not only to magnify his Graciousness to this fine Gentleman and myself; but to dispense Benefits to others? Which God of his Mercy grant!</p>
			<br class="small-break"/>
			<p>In the agreeable manner I have mentioned, did we pass the Time in our second happy Tour; and I thought Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em> would have sunk into the Ground, when she saw Mr. <em>Williams</em> brought in the Coach with us, and treated so kindly. We dined together in a most pleasant, and easy, and frank manner; and I found I needed not, from my Master’s Generosity, to be under any Restraint, as to my Conduct to this good Clergyman; for he, so often as he fansy’d I was reserv’d, mov’d me to be free with him, and to him; and several times called upon me to help my Father and Mr. <em>Williams;</em> and seem’d to take great Delight in seeing me carve and help round, as indeed he does in every thing I do.</p>
			<p>After Dinner we went and looked into the Chapel; which is a very pretty one, and very decent; and when finish’d, as he designs it, against his next coming down, will be a very pretty Place.</p>
			<p>My Heart, my dear Mother, when I first sat my Foot in it, throbb’d a good deal, with awful Joy, at the Thoughts of the Solemnity, which, I hope, will be, in a few Days, performed here. And when I came up towards the little pretty Altar-piece, while they were looking at a Communion-picture, and saying it was prettily done, I gently stept into a Corner, out of Sight, and poured out my Soul to God, on my Knees, in Thankfulness and Supplication, that, after having been so long absent from Divine Service, the first time that I enter’d into a House dedicated to His Honour, should be with such blessed Prospects before me; and begging of God to continue me humble, and to make me not unworthy of his Mercies; and that he would be pleased to bless the <em>next</em> Author of it, my good Master.</p>
			<p>I heard my Master say, Where’s <em>Pamela?</em> And so I broke off sooner than I would, and went up to him.</p>
			<p>He said, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, I hope I have not so offended you, by my Conduct past, (for really it is what I ought to be ashamed of) as that you will refuse to officiate, and to give us your Instructions here tomorrow. Mr. <em>Peters</em> was so kind, for the first time, to offer it; but I know it would be inconvenient for him; and besides, I was willing to make this Request to you an Introduction to our Reconciliation.</p>
			<p>Sir, said he, most willingly, and most gratefully will I obey you. Tho’, if you expect a Discourse, I am wholly unprepar’d for the Occasion. I would not have it, reply’d he, pointed to any particular Occasion; but if you have one upon the Text,—<em>There is more Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repenteth, than over Ninety-nine just Persons that need not Repentance</em>; and if it makes me not such a sad Fellow as to be pointed at by mine and the Ladies Servants we shall have here, I shall be well content. ’Tis a general Subject, added he, makes me speak of that; but any one you please will do; for you cannot make a bad Choice, I am sure.</p>
			<p>Sir, said he, I have one upon that Text; but I am ready to think, that a Thanksgiving one, which I made on a great Mercy to myself, if I may be permitted to make my own Acknowledgments of your Favour the Subject of a Discourse, will be suitable to my grateful Sentiments. It is on the Text,—<em>Now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace; for my Eyes have seen thy Salvation.</em></p>
			<p>That Text, said I, will be a very suitable one for me. Not so, <em>Pamela</em>, said my Master; because I don’t let you <em>depart</em> in <em>Peace;</em> but I hope you will <em>stay here</em> with <em>Content</em>.</p>
			<p>O but, Sir, said I, I have seen <em>God’s Salvation!</em>—I am sure, added I, if any body ever had Reason, I have, to say, with the blessed Virgin, <em>My Soul doth magnify the Lord;</em> for <em>he hath regarded the low Estate of his Handmaiden,—and exalted one of low Degree.</em></p>
			<p>Said my good Father, I am sure, if there were Time for it, the Book of <em>Ruth</em> would afford a fine Subject for the Honour done my dear Child.</p>
			<p>Why, good Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, said my Master, should you say so?—I know that Story, and Mr. <em>Williams</em> will confirm what I say, that my good Girl here will confer at least as much Honour as she will receive.</p>
			<p>Sir, said I, you are inexpressibly generous; but I shall never think so. Why, my <em>Pamela</em>, said he, that’s another thing: It will be best for me to think you will; and it will be kind in you to think you shan’t; and then we shall have always an excellent Rule to regulate our Conduct by to one another.</p>
			<p>Was not this finely, nobly, wisely said, my dear Mother?—O what a blessed thing it is to be match’d to a Man of Sense and Generosity!—How edifying!—How!—But what shall I say!—I am at a Loss for Words.</p>
			<p>Mr. <em>Williams</em> said, When we came out of the little Chapel, he would go home, and look over his Discourses, for one for the next Day. My Master said, I have one thing to say, before you go.—When my Jealousy, on Account of this good Girl, put me upon such a vindictive Conduct to you, you know I took a Bond for the Money I had caused you to be troubled for: I really am ashamed of the Matter; because I never intended, when I presented it to you, to have it again, you may be sure: But I knew not what might happen between you and her, nor how far Matters might have gone between you; and so I was willing to have that in Awe over you. And, I think, it is no extraordinary Present, therefore, to give you up your Bond again, cancell’d. And so he took it from his Pocket, and gave it him. I think, added he, all the Charges attending it, and the Trouble you had, were defray’d by my Attorney: I order’d that they should. They were, Sir, said he; and Ten thousand Thanks to you for this Goodness, and the kind manner in which you do it!—If you <em>will</em> go, Mr. <em>Williams</em>, said he, shall my Chariot carry you home? No, Sir, answer’d he, I thank you. My Time will be so well employ’d all the way in thinking of your Favours, that I chuse to meditate upon them, as I walk home.</p>
			<p>My dear Father was very uneasy about his Habit, for appearing at Chapel next Day, because of Miss <em>Darnfords</em>, and the Servants, for fear, poor Man, he should disgrace my Master; and he told me, when he was mentioning this, my Master’s kind Present of Twenty Guineas for Cloaths, for you both; which made my Heart truly joyful. But Oh! to be sure, I never can deserve the hundredth Part of his Goodness!—It is almost a hard thing to lie under the Weight of such deep Obligations on one side; and such a Sense of one’s own Unworthiness of the other!—O! what a Godlike Power is that of doing Good!—I envy the Rich and the Great for nothing else!</p>
			<p>My Master coming to us just then, I said, Oh! Sir, will your Bounty know no Limits! My dear Father has told me what you have given him!—A Trifle, <em>Pamela</em>, said he; a little Earnest only of my Kindness.—Say no more of it. But did I not hear the good Man expressing some sort of Concern for somewhat? Hide nothing from me, <em>Pamela</em>. Only, Sir, said I, he knew not how to absent himself from Divine Service, and yet is afraid of disgracing you by appearing.</p>
			<p>Fie, Mr. <em>Andrews</em>, said he, I thought you knew that the outward Appearance was nothing. I wish I had as good a Habit inwardly, as you have. But I’ll tell you, <em>Pamela</em>, your Father is not much thinner than I am, nor much shorter; he and I will walk up together to my Wardrobe; tho’ it is not so well stor’d here, as in <em>Bedfordshire</em>.</p>
			<p>And so, said he, pleasantly, Don’t you pretend to come near us, till I call you; for you must not yet see how Men dress and undress themselves. O, Sir, said my Father, I beg to be excused. I am sorry you are told. So am not I, said my Master: Pray come along with me.</p>
			<p>He carry’d him up Stairs, and shew’d him several Suits; and would have had him take his Choice. My poor Father was quite confounded: For my Master saw not any he thought too good, and my Father none that he thought bad enough. And my good Master, at last, (he fixing his Eye upon a fine Drab, which he thought looked the plainest) would help him to try the Coat and Waistcoat on himself; and indeed, one would not have thought it, because my Master is taller, and rather plumper, as I thought; but, as I saw afterwards, they fitted him very well: And being plain, and lined with the same Colour, and made for travelling in a Coach, pleased my poor Father much. He gave him the whole Suit, and calling up Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>, said, Let these Cloaths be well aired against to-morrow Morning. Mr. <em>Andrews</em> brought only with him his common Apparel; not thinking to stay <em>Sunday</em> with us. And pray see for some of my Stockens; and whether none of my Shoes will fit him; and see also for some of my Linen; for we have put the good Man quite out of his Course, by keeping him <em>Sunday</em> over. He was then pleased to give him the silver Buckles out of his own Shoes. So, my good Mother, you must expect to see my dear Father a great Beau. Wig, said my Master, he wants none; for his own venerable white Locks are better than all the Perukes in <em>England</em>.—But I am sure I have Hats enow somewhere. I’ll take care of every thing, Sir, said Mrs. <em>Jewkes</em>.—And my poor Father, when he came to me, could not refrain Tears. I know not how, said he, to comport myself under these great Favours. O my Child, it is all owing to God’s Goodness, and your Virtue.</p>
		</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>